<h1>35 Sonnets</h1>
<h2>by Fernando Pessoa</h2>
<h2>I.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Whether we write or speak or do but look<br/>
We are ever unapparent. What we are<br/>
Cannot be transfused into word or book.<br/>
Our soul from us is infinitely far.<br/>
However much we give our thoughts the will<br/>
To be our soul and gesture it abroad,<br/>
Our hearts are incommunicable still.<br/>
In what we show ourselves we are ignored.<br/>
The abyss from soul to soul cannot be bridged<br/>
By any skill of thought or trick of seeming.<br/>
Unto our very selves we are abridged<br/>
When we would utter to our thought our being.<br/>
    We are our dreams of ourselves, souls by gleams,<br/>
    And each to each other dreams of others’ dreams.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>II.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
If that apparent part of life’s delight<br/>
Our tingled flesh-sense circumscribes were seen<br/>
By aught save reflex and co-carnal sight,<br/>
Joy, flesh and life might prove but a gross screen.<br/>
Haply Truth’s body is no eyable being,<br/>
Appearance even as appearance lies,<br/>
Haply our close, dark, vague, warm sense of seeing<br/>
Is the choked vision of blindfolded eyes.<br/>
Wherefrom what comes to thought’s sense of life? Nought.<br/>
All is either the irrational world we see<br/>
Or some aught-else whose being-unknown doth rot<br/>
Its use for our thought’s use. Whence taketh me<br/>
    A qualm-like ache of life, a body-deep<br/>
    Soul-hate of what we seek and what we weep.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>III.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
When I do think my meanest line shall be<br/>
More in Time’s use than my creating whole,<br/>
That future eyes more clearly shall feel me<br/>
In this inked page than in my direct soul;<br/>
When I conjecture put to make me seeing<br/>
Good readers of me in some aftertime,<br/>
Thankful to some idea of my being<br/>
That doth not even my with gone true soul rime;<br/>
An anger at the essence of the world,<br/>
That makes this thus, or thinkable this wise,<br/>
Takes my soul by the throat and makes it hurled<br/>
In nightly horrors of despaired surmise,<br/>
    And I become the mere sense of a rage<br/>
    That lacks the very words whose waste might ’suage.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>IV.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
I could not think of thee as piecèd rot,<br/>
Yet such thou wert, for thou hadst been long dead;<br/>
Yet thou liv’dst entire in my seeing thought<br/>
And what thou wert in me had never fled.<br/>
Nay, I had fixed the moments of thy beauty—<br/>
Thy ebbing smile, thy kiss’s readiness,<br/>
And memory had taught my heart the duty<br/>
To know thee ever at that deathlessness.<br/>
But when I came where thou wert laid, and saw<br/>
The natural flowers ignoring thee sans blame,<br/>
And the encroaching grass, with casual flaw,<br/>
Framing the stone to age where was thy name,<br/>
    I knew not how to feel, nor what to be<br/>
    Towards thy fate’s material secrecy.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>V.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
How can I think, or edge my thoughts to action,<br/>
When the miserly press of each day’s need<br/>
Aches to a narrowness of spilled distraction<br/>
My soul appalled at the world’s work’s time-greed?<br/>
How can I pause my thoughts upon the task<br/>
My soul was born to think that it must do<br/>
When every moment has a thought to ask<br/>
To fit the immediate craving of its cue?<br/>
The coin I’d heap for marrying my Muse<br/>
And build our home i’th’ greater Time-to-be<br/>
Becomes dissolved by needs of each day’s use<br/>
And I feel beggared of infinity,<br/>
    Like a true-Christian sinner, each day flesh-driven<br/>
    By his own act to forfeit his wished heaven.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>VI.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
As a bad orator, badly o’er-book-skilled,<br/>
Doth overflow his purpose with made heat,<br/>
And, like a clock, winds with withoutness willed<br/>
What should have been an inner instinct’s feat;<br/>
Or as a prose-wit, harshly poet turned,<br/>
Lacking the subtler music in his measure,<br/>
With useless care labours but to be spurned,<br/>
Courting in alien speech the Muse’s pleasure;<br/>
I study how to love or how to hate,<br/>
Estranged by consciousness from sentiment,<br/>
With a thought feeling forced to be sedate<br/>
Even when the feeling’s nature is violent;<br/>
    As who would learn to swim without the river,<br/>
    When nearest to the trick, as far as ever.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>VII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Thy words are torture to me, that scarce grieve thee—<br/>
That entire death shall null my entire thought;<br/>
And I feel torture, not that I believe thee,<br/>
But that I cannot disbelieve thee not.<br/>
Shall that of me that now contains the stars<br/>
Be by the very contained stars survived?<br/>
Thus were Fate all unjust. Yet what truth bars<br/>
An all unjust Fate’s truth from being believed?<br/>
Conjecture cannot fit to the seen world<br/>
A garment of its thought untorn or covering,<br/>
Or with its stuffed garb forge an otherworld<br/>
Without itself its dead deceit discovering;<br/>
    So, all being possible, an idle thought may<br/>
    Less idle thoughts, self-known no truer, dismay.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>VIII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
How many masks wear we, and undermasks,<br/>
Upon our countenance of soul, and when,<br/>
If for self-sport the soul itself unmasks,<br/>
Knows it the last mask off and the face plain?<br/>
The true mask feels no inside to the mask<br/>
But looks out of the mask by co-masked eyes.<br/>
Whatever consciousness begins the task<br/>
The task’s accepted use to sleepness ties.<br/>
Like a child frighted by its mirrored faces,<br/>
Our souls, that children are, being thought-losing,<br/>
Foist otherness upon their seen grimaces<br/>
And get a whole world on their forgot causing;<br/>
    And, when a thought would unmask our soul’s masking,<br/>
    Itself goes not unmasked to the unmasking.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>IX.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Oh to be idle loving idleness!<br/>
But I am idle all in hate of me;<br/>
Ever in action’s dream, in the false stress<br/>
Of purposed action never set to be.<br/>
Like a fierce beast self-penned in a bait-lair,<br/>
My will to act binds with excess my action,<br/>
Not-acting coils the thought with raged despair,<br/>
And acting rage doth paint despair distraction.<br/>
Like someone sinking in a treacherous sand,<br/>
Each gesture to deliver sinks the more;<br/>
The struggle avails not, and to raise no hand,<br/>
Though but more slowly useless, we’ve no power.<br/>
    Hence live I the dead life each day doth bring,<br/>
    Repurposed for next day’s repurposing.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>X.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
As to a child, I talked my heart asleep<br/>
With empty promise of the coming day,<br/>
And it slept rather for my words made sleep<br/>
Than from a thought of what their sense did say.<br/>
For did it care for sense, would it not wake<br/>
And question closer to the morrow’s pleasure?<br/>
Would it not edge nearer my words, to take<br/>
The promise in the meting of its measure?<br/>
So, if it slept, ’twas that it cared but for<br/>
The present sleepy use of promised joy,<br/>
Thanking the fruit but for the forecome flower<br/>
Which the less active senses best enjoy.<br/>
    Thus with deceit do I detain the heart<br/>
    Of which deceit’s self knows itself a part.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XI.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Like to a ship that storms urge on its course,<br/>
By its own trials our soul is surer made.<br/>
The very things that make the voyage worse<br/>
Do make it better; its peril is its aid.<br/>
And, as the storm drives from the storm, our heart<br/>
Within the peril disimperilled grows;<br/>
A port is near the more from port we part—<br/>
The port whereto our driven direction goes.<br/>
If we reap knowledge to cross-profit, this<br/>
From storms we learn, when the storm’s height doth drive—<br/>
That the black presence of its violence is<br/>
The pushing promise of near far blue skies.<br/>
    Learn we but how to have the pilot-skill,<br/>
    And the storm’s very might shall mate our will.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
As the lone, frighted user of a night-road<br/>
Suddenly turns round, nothing to detect,<br/>
Yet on his fear’s sense keepeth still the load<br/>
Of that brink-nothing he doth but suspect;<br/>
And the cold terror moves to him more near<br/>
Of something that from nothing casts a spell,<br/>
That, when he moves, to fright more is not there,<br/>
And’s only visible when invisible<br/>
So I upon the world turn round in thought,<br/>
And nothing viewing do no courage take,<br/>
But my more terror, from no seen cause got,<br/>
To that felt corporate emptiness forsake,<br/>
    And draw my sense of mystery’s horror from<br/>
    Seeing no mystery’s mystery alone.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XIII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
When I should be asleep to mine own voice<br/>
In telling thee how much thy love’s my dream,<br/>
I find me listening to myself, the noise<br/>
Of my words othered in my hearing them.<br/>
Yet wonder not: this is the poet’s soul.<br/>
I could not tell thee well of how I love,<br/>
Loved I not less by knowing it, were all<br/>
My self my love and no thought love to prove.<br/>
What consciousness makes more by consciousness,<br/>
It makes less, for it makes it less itself,<br/>
My sense of love could not my love rich-dress<br/>
Did it not for it spend love’s own love-pelf.<br/>
    Poet’s love’s this (as in these words I prove thee):<br/>
    I love my love for thee more than I love thee.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XIV.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
We are born at sunset and we die ere morn,<br/>
And the whole darkness of the world we know,<br/>
How can we guess its truth, to darkness born,<br/>
The obscure consequence of absent glow?<br/>
Only the stars do teach us light. We grasp<br/>
Their scattered smallnesses with thoughts that stray,<br/>
And, though their eyes look through night’s complete mask,<br/>
Yet they speak not the features of the day.<br/>
Why should these small denials of the whole<br/>
More than the black whole the pleased eyes attract?<br/>
Why what it calls «worth» does the captive soul<br/>
Add to the small and from the large detract?<br/>
    So, put of light’s love wishing it night’s stretch,<br/>
    A nightly thought of day we darkly reach.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XV.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Like a bad suitor desperate and trembling<br/>
From the mixed sense of being not loved and loving,<br/>
Who with feared longing half would know, dissembling<br/>
With what he’d wish proved what he fears soon proving,<br/>
I look with inner eyes afraid to look,<br/>
Yet perplexed into looking, at the worth<br/>
This verse may have and wonder, of my book,<br/>
To what thoughts shall’t in alien hearts give birth.<br/>
But, as he who doth love, and, loving, hopes,<br/>
Yet, hoping, fears, fears to put proof to proof,<br/>
And in his mind for possible proofs gropes,<br/>
Delaying the true proof, lest the real thing scoff,<br/>
    I daily live, i’th’ fame I dream to see,<br/>
    But by my thought of others’ thought of me.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XVI.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
We never joy enjoy to that full point<br/>
Regret doth wish joy had enjoyèd been,<br/>
Nor have the strength regret to disappoint<br/>
Recalling not past joy’s thought, but its mien.<br/>
Yet joy was joy when it enjoyèd was<br/>
And after-enjoyed when as joy recalled,<br/>
It must have been joy ere its joy did pass<br/>
And, recalled, joy still, since its being-past galled.<br/>
Alas! All this is useless, for joy’s in<br/>
Enjoying, not in thinking of enjoying.<br/>
Its mere thought-mirroring gainst itself doth sin,<br/>
By mere reflecting solid life destroying,<br/>
    Yet the more thought we take to thought to prove<br/>
    It must not think, doth further from joy move.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XVII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
My love, and not I, is the egoist.<br/>
My love for thee loves itself more than thee;<br/>
Ay, more than me, in whom it doth exist,<br/>
And makes me live that it may feed on me.<br/>
In the country of bridges the bridge is<br/>
More real than the shores it doth unsever;<br/>
So in our world, all of Relation, this<br/>
Is true—that truer is Love than either lover.<br/>
This thought therefore comes lightly to Doubt’s door—<br/>
If we, seeing substance of this world, are not<br/>
Mere Intervals, God’s Absence and no more,<br/>
Hollows in real Consciousness and Thought.<br/>
    And if ’tis possible to Thought to bear this fruit,<br/>
    Why should it not be possible to Truth?
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XVIII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Indefinite space, which, by co-substance night,<br/>
In one black mystery two void mysteries blends;<br/>
The stray stars, whose innumerable light<br/>
Repeats one mystery till conjecture ends;<br/>
The stream of time, known by birth-bursting bubbles;<br/>
The gulf of silence, empty even of nought;<br/>
Thought’s high-walled maze, which the outed owner troubles<br/>
Because the string’s lost and the plan forgot:<br/>
When I think on this and that here I stand,<br/>
The thinker of these thoughts, emptily wise,<br/>
Holding up to my thinking my thing-hand<br/>
And looking at it with thought-alien eyes,<br/>
    The prayer of my wonder looketh past<br/>
    The universal darkness lone and vast.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XIX.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Beauty and love let no one separate,<br/>
Whom exact Nature did to each other fit,<br/>
Giving to Beauty love as finishing fate<br/>
And to Love beauty as true colour of it.<br/>
Let he but friend be who the soul finds fair,<br/>
But let none love outside the body’s thought,<br/>
So the seen couple’s togetherness shall bear<br/>
Truth to the beauty each in the other sought.<br/>
I could but love thee out of mockery<br/>
Of love and thee and mine own ugliness;<br/>
Therefore thy beauty I sing and wish not thee,<br/>
Thanking the Gods I long not out of place,<br/>
    Lest, like a slave that for kings’ robes doth long,<br/>
    Obtained, shall with mere wearing do them wrong.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XX.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
When in the widening circle of rebirth<br/>
To a new flesh my travelled soul shall come,<br/>
And try again the unremembered earth<br/>
With the old sadness for the immortal home,<br/>
Shall I revisit these same differing fields<br/>
And cull the old new flowers with the same sense,<br/>
That some small breath of foiled remembrance yields,<br/>
Of more age than my days in this pretence?<br/>
Shall I again regret strange faces lost<br/>
Of which the present memory is forgot<br/>
And but in unseen bulks of vagueness tossed<br/>
Out of the closed sea and black night of Thought?<br/>
    Were thy face one, what sweetness will’t not be,<br/>
    Though by blind feeling, to remember thee!
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXI.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Thought was born blind, but Thought knows what is seeing.<br/>
Its careful touch, deciphering forms from shapes,<br/>
Still suggests form as aught whose proper being<br/>
Mere finding touch with erring darkness drapes.<br/>
Yet whence, except from guessed sight, does touch teach<br/>
That touch is but a close and empty sense?<br/>
How does mere touch, self-uncontented, reach<br/>
For some truer sense’s whole intelligence?<br/>
The thing once touched, if touch be now omitted,<br/>
Stands yet in memory real and outward known,<br/>
So the untouching memory of touch is fitted<br/>
With sense of a sense whereby far things are shown<br/>
    So, by touch of untouching, wrongly aright,<br/>
    Touch’ thought of seeing sees not things but Sight.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
My soul is a stiff pageant, man by man,<br/>
Of some Egyptian art than Egypt older,<br/>
Found in some tomb whose rite no guess can scan,<br/>
Where all things else to coloured dust did moulder.<br/>
Whate’er its sense may mean, its age is twin<br/>
To that of priesthoods whose feet stood near God,<br/>
When knowledge was so great that ’twas a sin<br/>
And man’s mere soul too man for its abode.<br/>
But when I ask what means that pageant I<br/>
And would look at it suddenly, I lose<br/>
The sense I had of seeing it, nor can try<br/>
Again to look, nor hath my memory a use<br/>
    That seems recalling, save that it recalls<br/>
    An emptiness of having seen those walls.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXIII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Even as upon a low and cloud-domed day,<br/>
When clouds are one cloud till the horizon,<br/>
Our thinking senses deem the sun away<br/>
And say «’tis sunless» and «there is no sun»;<br/>
And yet the very day they wrong truth by<br/>
Is of the unseen sun’s effluent essence,<br/>
The very words do give themselves the lie,<br/>
The very thought of absence comes from presence:<br/>
Even so deem we through Good of what is evil.<br/>
He speaks of light that speaks of absent light,<br/>
And absent god, becoming present devil,<br/>
Is still the absent god by essence’ right.<br/>
    The withdrawn cause by being withdrawn doth get<br/>
    (Being thereby cause still) the denied effect.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXIV.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Something in me was born before the stars<br/>
And saw the sun begin from far away.<br/>
Our yellow, local day on its wont jars,<br/>
For it hath communed with an absolute day.<br/>
Through my Thought’s night, as a worn robe’s heard trail<br/>
That I have never seen, I drag this past<br/>
That saw the Possible like a dawn grow pale<br/>
On the lost night before it, mute and vast.<br/>
It dates remoter than God’s birth can reach,<br/>
That had no birth but the world’s coming after.<br/>
So the world’s to me as, after whispered speech,<br/>
The cause-ignored sudden echoing of laughter.<br/>
    That ’t has a meaning my conjecture knows,<br/>
    But that ’t has meaning’s all its meaning shows.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXV.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
We are in Fate and Fate’s and do but lack<br/>
Outness from soul to know ourselves its dwelling,<br/>
And do but compel Fate aside or back<br/>
By Fate’s own immanence in the compelling.<br/>
We are too far in us from outward truth<br/>
To know how much we are not what we are,<br/>
And live but in the heat of error’s youth,<br/>
Yet young enough its acting youth to ignore.<br/>
The doubleness of mind fails us, to glance<br/>
At our exterior presence amid things,<br/>
Sizing from otherness our countenance<br/>
And seeing our puppet will’s act-acting strings.<br/>
    An unknown language speaks in us, which we<br/>
    Are at the words of, fronted from reality.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXVI.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
The world is woven all of dream and error<br/>
And but one sureness in our truth may lie—<br/>
That when we hold to aught our thinking’s mirror<br/>
We know it not by knowing it thereby.<br/>
For but one side of things the mirror knows,<br/>
And knows it colded from its solidness.<br/>
A double lie its truth is; what it shows<br/>
By true show’s false and nowhere by true place.<br/>
Thought clouds our life’s day-sense with strangeness, yet<br/>
Never from strangeness more than that it’s strange<br/>
Doth buy our perplexed thinking, for we get<br/>
But the words’ sense from words—knowledge, truth, change.<br/>
    We know the world is false, not what is true.<br/>
    Yet we think on, knowing we ne’er shall know.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXVII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
How yesterday is long ago! The past<br/>
Is a fixed infinite distance from to-day,<br/>
And bygone things, the first-lived as the last,<br/>
In irreparable sameness far away.<br/>
How the to-be is infinitely ever<br/>
Out of the place wherein it will be Now,<br/>
Like the seen wave yet far up in the river,<br/>
Which reaches not us, but the new-waved flow!<br/>
This thing Time is, whose being is having none,<br/>
The equable tyrant of our different fates,<br/>
Who could not be bought off by a shattered sun<br/>
Or tricked by new use of our careful dates.<br/>
    This thing Time is, that to the grave-will bear<br/>
    My heart, sure but of it and of my fear.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXVIII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
The edge of the green wave whitely doth hiss<br/>
Upon the wetted sand. I look, yet dream.<br/>
Surely reality cannot be this!<br/>
Somehow, somewhere this surely doth but seem!<br/>
The sky, the sea, this great extent disclosed<br/>
Of outward joy, this bulk of life we feel,<br/>
Is not something, but something interposed.<br/>
Only what in this is not this is real.<br/>
If this be to have sense, if to be awake<br/>
Be but to see this bright, great sleep of things,<br/>
For the rarer potion mine own dreams I’ll take<br/>
And for truth commune with imaginings,<br/>
    Holding a dream too bitter, a too fair curse,<br/>
    This common sleep of men, the universe.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXIX.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
My weary life, that lives unsatisfied<br/>
On the foiled off-brink of being e’er but this,<br/>
To whom the power to will hath been denied<br/>
And the will to renounce doth also miss;<br/>
My sated life, with having nothing sated,<br/>
In the motion of moving poisèd aye,<br/>
Within its dreams from its own dreams abated—<br/>
This life let the Gods change or take away.<br/>
For this endless succession of empty hours,<br/>
Like deserts after deserts, voidly one,<br/>
Doth undermine the very dreaming powers<br/>
And dull even thought’s active inaction,<br/>
    Tainting with fore-unwilled will the dreamed act<br/>
    Twice thus removed from the unobtained fact.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXX.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
I do not know what truth the false untruth<br/>
Of this sad sense of the seen world may own,<br/>
Or if this flowered plant bears also a fruit<br/>
Unto the true reality unknown.<br/>
But as the rainbow, neither earth’s nor sky’s,<br/>
Stands in the dripping freshness of lulled rain,<br/>
A hope, not real yet not fancy’s, lies<br/>
Athwart the moment of our ceasing pain.<br/>
Somehow, since pain is felt yet felt as ill,<br/>
Hope hath a better warrant than being hoped;<br/>
Since pain is felt as aught we should not feel<br/>
Man hath a Nature’s reason for having groped,<br/>
    Since Time was Time and age and grief his measures,<br/>
    Towards a better shelter than Time’s pleasures.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXXI.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
I am older than Nature and her Time<br/>
By all the timeless age of Consciousness,<br/>
And my adult oblivion of the clime<br/>
Where I was born makes me not countryless.<br/>
Ay, and dim through my daylight thoughts escape<br/>
Yearnings for that land where my childhood dreamed,<br/>
Which I cannot recall in colour or shape<br/>
But haunts my hours like something that hath gleamed<br/>
And yet is not as light remembered,<br/>
Nor to the left or to the right conceived;<br/>
And all round me tastes as if life were dead<br/>
And the world made but to be disbelieved.<br/>
    Thus I my hope on unknown truth lay; yet<br/>
    How but by hope do I the unknown truth get?
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXXII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
When I have sense of what to sense appears,<br/>
Sense is sense ere ’tis mine or mine in me is.<br/>
When I hear, Hearing, ere I do hear, hears.<br/>
When I see, before me abstract Seeing sees.<br/>
I am part Soul part I in all I touch—<br/>
Soul by that part I hold in common with all,<br/>
And I the spoiled part, that doth make sense such<br/>
As I can err by it and my sense mine call.<br/>
The rest is wondering what these thoughts may mean,<br/>
That come to explain and suddenly are gone,<br/>
Like messengers that mock the message’ mien,<br/>
Explaining all but the explanation;<br/>
    As if we a ciphered letter’s cipher hit<br/>
    And find it in an unknown language writ.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXXIII.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
He that goes back does, since he goes, advance,<br/>
Though he doth not advance who goeth back,<br/>
And he that seeks, though he on nothing chance,<br/>
May still by words be said to find a lack.<br/>
This paradox of having, that is nought<br/>
In the world’s meaning of the things it screens,<br/>
Is yet true of the substance of pure thought<br/>
And there means something by the nought it means.<br/>
For thinking nought does on nought being confer,<br/>
As giving not is acting not to give,<br/>
And, to the same unbribed true thought, to err<br/>
Is to find truth, though by its negative.<br/>
    So why call this world false, if false to be<br/>
    Be to be aught, and being aught Being to be?
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXXIV.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Happy the maimed, the halt, the mad, the blind—<br/>
All who, stamped separate by curtailing birth,<br/>
Owe no duty’s allegiance to mankind<br/>
Nor stand a valuing in their scheme of worth!<br/>
But I, whom Fate, not Nature, did curtail,<br/>
By no exterior voidness being exempt,<br/>
Must bear accusing glances where I fail,<br/>
Fixed in the general orbit of contempt.<br/>
Fate, less than Nature in being kind to lacking,<br/>
Giving the ill, shows not as outer cause,<br/>
Making our mock-free will the mirror’s backing<br/>
Which Fate’s own acts as if in itself shows;<br/>
    And men, like children, seeing the image there,<br/>
    Take place for cause and make our will Fate bear.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
</p><div class="chapter">
<h2>XXXV.</h2>
<p class="noindent">
Good. I have done. My heart weighs. I am sad.<br/>
The outer day, void statue of lit blue,<br/>
Is altogether outward, other, glad<br/>
At mere being not-I (so my aches construe).<br/>
I, that have failed in everything, bewail<br/>
Nothing this hour but that I have bewailed,<br/>
For in the general fate what is’t to fail?<br/>
Why, fate being past for Fate, ’tis but to have failed.<br/>
Whatever hap-or stop, what matters it,<br/>
Sith to the mattering our will bringeth nought?<br/>
With the higher trifling let us world our wit,<br/>
Conscious that, if we do’t, that was the lot<br/>
    The regular stars bound us to, when they stood<br/>
    Godfathers to our birth and to our blood.
</p>
</div><p><!--end chapter-->
	<h2>ENGLISH<br>
POEMS</h2>
<h5>BY</h5>
<h3>FERNANDO PESSOA</h3>
<h4>I.—ANTINOUS<br>
II.—INSCRIPTIONS</h4>
<h5>LISBON</h5>
<h5>«OLISIPO», APARTADO 145</h5>
<h5>1921</h5>
<hr class="r5">
<p><br></p>
<p>
<i>An early and very imperfect draft of</i> Antinous <i>was published in 1918.
The present one is meant to annul and supersede that, from which it is
essentially different.</i>—Inscriptions <i>is now first published.</i>
</p>
<hr class="r5">
<p><br></p>
<h4>INDEX</h4>
<p class="nind">I. <a href="#chap01" class="pginternal">ANTINOUS</a><br>
II. <a href="#chap02" class="pginternal">INSCRIPTIONS</a></p>
<hr class="r5">
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4> <a id="chap01"></a></h4>
<h4>I
<br><br>
ANTINOUS</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>The rain outside was cold in Hadrian's soul.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>The boy lay dead</span><br>
<span>On the low couch, on whose denuded whole,</span><br>
<span>To Hadrian's eyes, whose sorrow was a dread,</span><br>
<span>The shadowy light of Death's eclipse was shed.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>The boy lay dead, and the day seemed a night</span><br>
<span>Outside. The rain fell like a sick affright</span><br>
<span>Of Nature at her work in killing him.</span><br>
<span>Memory of what he was gave no delight,</span><br>
<span>Delight at what he was dead and dim.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>O hands that once had clasped Hadrian's warm hands,</span><br>
<span>Whose cold now found them cold!</span><br>
<span>O hair bound erstwhile with the pressing bands!</span><br>
<span>O eyes half-diffidently bold!</span><br>
<span>O bare female male-body such</span><br>
<span>As a god's likeness to humanity!</span><br>
<span>O lips whose opening redness erst could touch</span><br>
<span>Lust's seats with a live art's variety!</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>O fingers skilled in things not to be told!</span><br>
<span>O tongue which, counter-tongued, made the blood bold!</span><br>
<span>O complete regency of lust throned on</span><br>
<span>Raged consciousness's spilled suspension!</span><br>
<span>These things are things that now must be no more.</span><br>
<span>The rain is silent, and the Emperor</span><br>
<span>Sinks by the couch. His grief is like a rage,</span><br>
<span>For the gods take away the life they give</span><br>
<span>And spoil the beauty they made live.</span><br>
<span>He weeps and knows that every future age</span><br>
<span>Is looking on him out of the to-be;</span><br>
<span>His love is on a universal stage;</span><br>
<span>A thousand unborn eyes weep with his misery.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Antinous is dead, is dead for ever,</span><br>
<span>Is dead for ever and all loves lament.</span><br>
<span>Venus herself, that was Adonis' lover,</span><br>
<span>Seeing him, that newly lived, now dead again,</span><br>
<span>Lends her old griefs renewal to be blent</span><br>
<span>With Hadrian's pain.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Now is Apollo sad because the stealer</span><br>
<span>Of his white body is for ever cold.</span><br>
<span>No careful kisses on that nippled point</span><br>
<span>Covering his heart-beats' silent place restore</span><br>
<span>His life again to ope his eyes and feel her</span><br>
<span>Presence along his veins Love's fortress hold.</span><br>
<span>No warmth of his another's warmth demands.</span><br>
<span>Now will his hands behind his head no more</span><br>
<span>Linked, in that posture giving all but hands,</span><br>
<span>On the projected body hands implore.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>The rain falls, and he lies like one who hath</span><br>
<span>Forgotten all the gestures of his love</span><br>
<span>And lies awake waiting their hot return.</span><br>
<span>But all his arts and toys are now with Death.</span><br>
<span>This human ice no way of heat can move;</span><br>
<span>These ashes of a fire no flame can burn.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>O Hadrian, what will now thy cold life be?</span><br>
<span>What boots it to be lord of men and might?</span><br>
<span>His absence o'er thy visible empery</span><br>
<span>Comes like a night,</span><br>
<span>Nor is there morn in hopes of new delight.</span><br>
<span>Now are thy nights widowed of love and kisses;</span><br>
<span>Now are thy days robbed of the night's awaiting;</span><br>
<span>Now have thy lips no purpose for thy blisses,</span><br>
<span>Left but to speak the name that Death is mating</span><br>
<span>With solitude and sorrow and affright.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Thy vague hands grope, as if they had dropped joy.</span><br>
<span>To hear that the rain ceases lift thy head,</span><br>
<span>And thy raised glance take to the lovely boy.</span><br>
<span>Naked he lies upon that memoried bed;</span><br>
<span>By thine own hand he lies uncovered.</span><br>
<span>There was he wont thy dangling sense to cloy,</span><br>
<span>And uncloy with more cloying, and annoy</span><br>
<span>With newer uncloying till thy senses bled.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>His hand and mouth knew games to reinstal</span><br>
<span>Desire that thy worn spine was hurt to follow.</span><br>
<span>Sometimes it seemed to thee that all was hollow</span><br>
<span>In sense in each new straining of sucked lust.</span><br>
<span>Then still new turns of toying would he call</span><br>
<span>To thy nerves' flesh, and thou wouldst tremble and fall</span><br>
<span>Back on thy cushions with thy mind's sense hushed.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«Beautiful was my love, yet melancholy.</span><br>
<span>He had that art, that makes love captive wholly,</span><br>
<span>Of being slowly sad among lust's rages.</span><br>
<span>Now the Nile gave him up, the eternal Nile.</span><br>
<span>Under his wet locks Death's blue paleness wages</span><br>
<span>Now war upon our wishing with sad smile.»</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Even as he thinks, the lust that is no more</span><br>
<span>Than a memory of lust revives and takes</span><br>
<span>His senses by the hand, his felt flesh wakes,</span><br>
<span>And all becomes again what 'twas before.</span><br>
<span>The dead body on the bed starts up and lives</span><br>
<span>And comes to lie with him, close, closer, and</span><br>
<span>A creeping love-wise and invisible hand</span><br>
<span>At every body-entrance to his lust</span><br>
<span>Whispers caresses which flit off yet just</span><br>
<span>Remain enough to bleed his last nerve's strand,</span><br>
<span>O sweet and cruel Parthian fugitives!</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>So he half rises, looking on his lover,</span><br>
<span>That now can love nothing but what none know.</span><br>
<span>Vaguely, half-seeing what he doth behold,</span><br>
<span>He runs his cold lips all the body over.</span><br>
<span>And so ice-senseless are his lips that, lo!,</span><br>
<span>He scarce tastes death from the dead body's cold,</span><br>
<span>But it seems both are dead or living both</span><br>
<span>And love is still the presence and the mover.</span><br>
<span>Then his lips cease on the other lips' cold sloth.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Ah, there the wanting breath reminds his lips</span><br>
<span>That from beyond the gods hath moved a mist</span><br>
<span>Between him and this boy. His finger-tips,</span><br>
<span>Still idly searching o'er the body, list</span><br>
<span>For some flesh-response to their waking mood.</span><br>
<span>But their love-question is not understood:</span><br>
<span>The god is dead whose cult was to be kissed!</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>He lifts his hand up to where heaven should be</span><br>
<span>And cries on the mute gods to know his pain.</span><br>
<span>Let your calm faces turn aside to his plea,</span><br>
<span>O granting powers! He will yield up his reign.</span><br>
<span>In the still deserts he will parched live,</span><br>
<span>In the far barbarous roads beggar or slave,</span><br>
<span>But to his arms again the warm boy give!</span><br>
<span>Forego that space ye meant to be his grave!</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Take all the female loveliness of earth</span><br>
<span>And in one mound of death its remnant spill!</span><br>
<span>But, by sweet Ganymede, that Jove found worth</span><br>
<span>And above Hebe did elect to fill</span><br>
<span>His cup at his high feasting, and instil</span><br>
<span>The friendlier love that fills the other's dearth,</span><br>
<span>The clod of female embraces resolve</span><br>
<span>To dust, O father of the gods, but spare</span><br>
<span>This boy and his white body and golden hair!</span><br>
<span>Maybe thy better Ganymede thou feel'st</span><br>
<span>That he should be, and out of jealous care</span><br>
<span>From Hadrian's arms to thine his beauty steal'st.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>He was a kitten playing with lust, playing</span><br>
<span>With his own and with Hadrian's, sometimes one</span><br>
<span>And sometimes two, now linking, now undone;</span><br>
<span>Now leaving lust, now lust's high lusts delaying;</span><br>
<span>Now eyeing lust not wide, but from askance</span><br>
<span>Jumping round on lust's half-unexpectance;</span><br>
<span>Now softly gripping, then with fury holding,</span><br>
<span>Now playfully playing, now seriously, now lying</span><br>
<span>By th' side of lust looking at it, now spying</span><br>
<span>Which way to take lust in his lust's withholding.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Thus did the hours slide from their tangled hands</span><br>
<span>And from their mixed limbs the moments slip.</span><br>
<span>Now were his arms dead leaves, now iron bands;</span><br>
<span>Now were his lips cups, now the things that sip;</span><br>
<span>Now were his eyes too closed and now too looking;</span><br>
<span>Now were his uncontinuings frenzy working;</span><br>
<span>Now were his arts a feather and now a whip.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>That love they lived as a religion</span><br>
<span>Offered to gods that come themselves to men.</span><br>
<span>Sometimes he was adorned or made to don</span><br>
<span>Half-vestures, then in statued nudity</span><br>
<span>Did imitate some god that seems to be</span><br>
<span>By marble's accurate virtue men's again.</span><br>
<span>Now was he Venus, white out of the seas;</span><br>
<span>And now was he Apollo, young and golden;</span><br>
<span>Now as Jove sate he in mock judgment over</span><br>
<span>The presence at his feet of his slaved lover;</span><br>
<span>Now was he an acted rite, by one beholden,</span><br>
<span>In ever-repositioned mysteries.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Now he is something anyone can be.</span><br>
<span>O stark negation of the thing it is!</span><br>
<span>O golden-haired moon-cold loveliness!</span><br>
<span>Too cold! too cold! and love as cold as he!</span><br>
<span>Love through the memories of his love doth roam</span><br>
<span>As through a labyrinth, in sad madness glad,</span><br>
<span>And now calls on his name and bids him come,</span><br>
<span>And now is smiling at his imaged coming</span><br>
<span>That is i'th' heart like faces in the gloaming—</span><br>
<span>Mere shining shadows of the forms they had.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>The rain again like a vague pain arose</span><br>
<span>And put the sense of wetness in the air.</span><br>
<span>Suddenly did the Emperor suppose</span><br>
<span>He saw this room and all in it from far.</span><br>
<span>He saw the couch, the boy, and his own frame</span><br>
<span>Cast down against the couch, and he became</span><br>
<span>A clearer presence to himself, and said</span><br>
<span>These words unuttered, save to his soul's dread:</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«I shall build thee a statue that will be</span><br>
<span>To the continued future evidence</span><br>
<span>Of my love and thy beauty and the sense</span><br>
<span>That beauty giveth of divinity.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Though death with subtle uncovering hands remove</span><br>
<span>The apparel of life and empire from our love,</span><br>
<span>Yet its nude statue, that thou dost inspirit,</span><br>
<span>All future times, whether they will't or not,</span><br>
<span>Shall, like a gift a forcing god hath brought,</span><br>
<span>Inevitably inherit.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«Ay, this thy statue shall I build, and set</span><br>
<span>Upon the pinnacle of being thine, that Time</span><br>
<span>By its subtle dim crime</span><br>
<span>Will fear to eat it from life, or to fret</span><br>
<span>With war's or envy's rage from bulk and stone.</span><br>
<span>Fate cannot be that! Gods themselves, that make</span><br>
<span>Things change, Fate's own hand, that doth overtake</span><br>
<span>The gods themselves with darkness, will draw back</span><br>
<span>From marring thus thy statue and my boon,</span><br>
<span>Leaving the wide world hollow with thy lack.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«This picture of our love will bridge the ages.</span><br>
<span>It will loom white out of the past and be</span><br>
<span>Eternal, like a Roman victory,</span><br>
<span>In every heart the future will give rages</span><br>
<span>Of not being our love's contemporary.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«Yet oh that this were needed not, and thou</span><br>
<span>Wert the red flower perfuming my life,</span><br>
<span>The garland on the brows of my delight,</span><br>
<span>The living flame on altars of my soul!</span><br>
<span>Would all this were a thing thou mightest now</span><br>
<span>Smile at from under thy death-mocking lids</span><br>
<span>And wonder that I should so put a strife</span><br>
<span>Twixt me and gods for thy lost presence bright;</span><br>
<span>Were there nought in this but my empty dole</span><br>
<span>And thy awakening smile half to condole</span><br>
<span>With what my dreaming pain to hope forbids.»</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Thus went he, like a lover who is waiting,</span><br>
<span>From place to place in his dim doubting mind.</span><br>
<span>Now was his hope a great intention fating</span><br>
<span>Its wish to being, now felt he was blind</span><br>
<span>In some point of his seen wish undefined.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>When love meets death we know not what to feel.</span><br>
<span>When death foils love we know not what to know.</span><br>
<span>Now did his doubt hope, now did his hope doubt;</span><br>
<span>Now what his wish dreamed the dream's sense did flout</span><br>
<span>And to a sullen emptiness congeal.</span><br>
<span>Then again the gods fanned love's darkening glow.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«Thy death has given me a higher lust—</span><br>
<span>A flesh-lust raging for eternity.</span><br>
<span>On mine imperial fate I set my trust</span><br>
<span>That the high gods, that made me emperor be,</span><br>
<span>Will not annul from a more real life</span><br>
<span>My wish that thou should'st live for e'er and stand</span><br>
<span>A fleshly presence on their better land,</span><br>
<span>More lovely yet not lovelier, for there</span><br>
<span>No things impossible our wishes mar</span><br>
<span>Nor pain our hearts with change and time and strife.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«Love, love, my love! thou art already a god.</span><br>
<span>This thought of mine, which I a wish believe,</span><br>
<span>Is no wish, but a sight, to me allowed</span><br>
<span>By the great gods, that love and can give</span><br>
<span>To mortal hearts, under the shape of wishes—</span><br>
<span>Of wishes having undiscovered reaches—,</span><br>
<span>A vision of the real things beyond</span><br>
<span>Our life-imprisoned life, our sense-bound sense.</span><br>
<span>Ay, what I wish thee to be thou art now</span><br>
<span>Already. Already on Olympic ground</span><br>
<span>Thou walkest and art perfect, yet art thou,</span><br>
<span>For thou needst no excess of thee to don</span><br>
<span>Perfect to be, being perfection.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«My heart is singing like a morning bird.</span><br>
<span>A great hope from the gods comes down to me</span><br>
<span>And bids my heart to subtler sense be stirred</span><br>
<span>And think not that strange evil of thee</span><br>
<span>That to think thee mortal would be.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«My love, my love, my god-love! Let me kiss</span><br>
<span>On thy cold lips thy hot lips now immortal,</span><br>
<span>Greeting thee at Death's portal's happiness,</span><br>
<span>For to the gods Death's portal is Life's portal.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«Were no Olympus yet for thee, my love</span><br>
<span>Would make thee one, where thou sole god mightst prove,</span><br>
<span>And I thy sole adorer, glad to be</span><br>
<span>Thy sole adorer through infinity.</span><br>
<span>That were a universe divine enough</span><br>
<span>For love and me and what to me thou art.</span><br>
<span>To have thee is a thing made of gods' stuff</span><br>
<span>And to look on thee eternity's best part.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«But this is true and mine own art: the god</span><br>
<span>Thou art now is a body made by me,</span><br>
<span>For, if thou art now flesh reality</span><br>
<span>Beyond where men age and night cometh still,</span><br>
<span>'Tis to my love's great making power thou owest</span><br>
<span>That life thou on thy memory bestowest</span><br>
<span>And mak'st it carnal. Had my love not held</span><br>
<span>An empire of my mighty legioned will,</span><br>
<span>Thou to gods' consort hadst not been compelled.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«My love that found thee, when it found thee did</span><br>
<span>But find its own true body and exact look.</span><br>
<span>Therefore when now thy memory I bid</span><br>
<span>Become a god where gods are, I but move</span><br>
<span>To death's high column's top the shape it took</span><br>
<span>And set it there for vision of all love.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«O love, my love, put up with my strong will</span><br>
<span>Of loving to Olympus, be thou there</span><br>
<span>The latest god, whose honey-coloured hair</span><br>
<span>Takes divine eyes! As thou wert on earth, still</span><br>
<span>In heaven bodifully be and roam,</span><br>
<span>A prisoner of that happiness of home,</span><br>
<span>With elder gods, while I on earth do make</span><br>
<span>A statue for thy deathlessness' seen sake.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«Yet thy true deathless statue I shall build</span><br>
<span>Will be no stone thing, but that same regret</span><br>
<span>By which our love's eternity is willed.</span><br>
<span>One side of that is thou, as gods see thee</span><br>
<span>Now, and the other, here, thy memory.</span><br>
<span>My sorrow will make that men's god, and set</span><br>
<span>Thy naked memory on the parapet</span><br>
<span>That looks upon the seas of future times.</span><br>
<span>Some will say all our love was but our crimes;</span><br>
<span>Others against our names the knives will whet</span><br>
<span>Of their glad hate of beauty's beauty, and make</span><br>
<span>Our names a base of heap whereon to rake</span><br>
<span>The names of all our brothers with quick scorn.</span><br>
<span>Yet will our presence, like eternal Morn,</span><br>
<span>Ever return at Beauty's hour, and shine</span><br>
<span>Out of the East of Love, in light to enshrine</span><br>
<span>New gods to come, the lacking world to adorn.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«All that thou art now is thyself and I.</span><br>
<span>Our dual presence has its unity</span><br>
<span>In that perfection of body which my love,</span><br>
<span>By loving it, became, and did from life</span><br>
<span>Raise into godness, calm above the strife</span><br>
<span>Of times, and changing passions far above.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«But since men see more with the eyes than soul,</span><br>
<span>Still I in stone shall utter this great dole;</span><br>
<span>Still, eager that men hunger by thy presence,</span><br>
<span>I shall to marble carry this regret</span><br>
<span>That in my heart like a great star is set.</span><br>
<span>Thus, even in stone, our love shall stand so great</span><br>
<span>In thy statue of us, like a god's fate,</span><br>
<span>Our love's incarnate and discarnate essence,</span><br>
<span>That, like a trumpet reaching over seas</span><br>
<span>And going from continent to continent,</span><br>
<span>Our love shall speak its joy and woe, death-blent,</span><br>
<span>Over infinities and eternities.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«And here, memory or statue, we shall stand,</span><br>
<span>Still the same one, as we were hand in hand</span><br>
<span>Nor felt each other's hand for feeling.</span><br>
<span>Men still will see me when thy sense they take.</span><br>
<span>The entire gods might pass, in the vast wheeling</span><br>
<span>Of the globed ages. If but for thy sake,</span><br>
<span>That, being theirs, hadst gone with their gone band,</span><br>
<span>They would return, as they had slept to wake.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>«Then the end of days when Jove were born again</span><br>
<span>And Ganymede again pour at his feast</span><br>
<span>Would see our dual soul from death released</span><br>
<span>And recreated unto joy, fear, pain—</span><br>
<span>All that love doth contain;</span><br>
<span>Life—all the beauty that doth make a lust</span><br>
<span>Of love's own true love, at the spell amazed;</span><br>
<span>And, if our very memory wore to dust,</span><br>
<span>By some gods' race of the end of ages must</span><br>
<span>Our dual unity again be raised.»</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>It rained still. But slow-treading night came in,</span><br>
<span>Closing the weary eyelids of each sense.</span><br>
<span>The very consciousness of self and soul</span><br>
<span>Grew, like a landscape through dim raining, dim.</span><br>
<span>The Emperor lay still, so still that now</span><br>
<span>He half forgot where now he lay, or whence</span><br>
<span>The sorrow that was still salt on his lips.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>All had been something very far, a scroll</span><br>
<span>Rolled up. The things he felt were like the rim</span><br>
<span>That haloes round the moon when the night weeps.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>His head was bowed into his arms, and they</span><br>
<span>On the low couch, foreign to his sense, lay.</span><br>
<span>His closed eyes seemed open to him, and seeing</span><br>
<span>The naked floor, dark, cold, sad and unmeaning.</span><br>
<span>His hurting breath was all his sense could know.</span><br>
<span>Out of the falling darkness the wind rose</span><br>
<span>And fell; a voice swooned in the courts below;</span><br>
<span>And the Emperor slept.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i21">The gods came now</span><br>
<span>And bore something away, no sense knows how,</span><br>
<span>On unseen arms of power and repose.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h5>LISBON, 1915.</h5>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4> <a id="chap02"></a></h4>
<h4>II
<br><br>
INSCRIPTIONS</h4>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>I</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>We pass and dream. Earth smiles. Virtue is rare.</span><br>
<span>Age, duty, gods weigh on our conscious bliss.</span><br>
<span>Hope for the best and for the worst prepare.</span><br>
<span>That sum of purposed wisdom speaks in this.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>II</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Me, Chloe, a maid, the mighty fates have given,</span><br>
<span>Who was nought to them, to the peopled shades.</span><br>
<span>Thus the gods will. My years were but twice seven.</span><br>
<span>I am forgotten in my distant glades.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>III</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>From my villa on the hill I long looked down</span><br>
<span>Upon the muttering town;</span><br>
<span>Then one day drew (life sight-sick, dull hope shed)</span><br>
<span>My toga o'er my head</span><br>
<span>(The simplest gesture being the greatest thing)</span><br>
<span>Like a raised wing.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>IV</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Not Cecrops kept my bees. My olives bore</span><br>
<span>Oil like the sun. My several herd lowed far.</span><br>
<span>The breathing traveller rested by my door.</span><br>
<span>The wet earth smells still; dead ray nostrils are.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>V</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>I conquered. Far barbarians hear my name.</span><br>
<span>Men were dice in my game,</span><br>
<span>But to my throw myself did lesser come:</span><br>
<span>I threw dice, Fate the sum.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>VI</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Some were as loved, some as prizes prized.</span><br>
<span>A natural wife to the fed man my mate,</span><br>
<span>I was sufficient to whom I sufficed.</span><br>
<span>I moved, slept, bore and aged without a fate.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>VII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>I put by pleasure like an alien bowl.</span><br>
<span>Stern, separate, mine, I looked towards where gods seem.</span><br>
<span>From behind me the common shadow stole.</span><br>
<span>Dreaming that I slept not, I slept my dream.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>VIII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Scarce five years passed ere I passed too.</span><br>
<span>Death came and took the child he found.</span><br>
<span>No god spared, or fate smiled at, so</span><br>
<span>Small hands, clutching so little round.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>IX</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>There is a silence where the town was old.</span><br>
<span>Grass grows where not a memory lies below.</span><br>
<span>We that dined loud are sand. The tale is told.</span><br>
<span>The far hoofs hush. The inn's last light doth go.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>X</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>We, that both lie here, loved. This denies us.</span><br>
<span>My lost hand crumbles where her breasts' lack is.</span><br>
<span>Love's known, each lover is anonymous.</span><br>
<span>We both felt fair. Kiss, for that was our kiss.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XI</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>I for my city's want fought far and fell.</span><br>
<span>I could not tell</span><br>
<span>What she did want, that knew she wanted me.</span><br>
<span>Her walls be free,</span><br>
<span>Her speech keep such as I spoke, and men die,</span><br>
<span>That she die not, as I.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Life lived us, not we life. We, as bees sip,</span><br>
<span>Looked, talked and had. Trees grow as we did last.</span><br>
<span>We loved the gods but as we see a ship.</span><br>
<span>Never aware of being aware, we passed.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XIII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>The work is done. The hammer is laid down.</span><br>
<span>The artisans, that built the slow-grown town,</span><br>
<span>Have been succeeded by those who still built.</span><br>
<span>All this is something lack-of-something screening.</span><br>
<span>The thought whole has no meaning</span><br>
<span>But lies by Time's wall like a pitcher spilt.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XIV</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>This covers me, that erst had the blue sky.</span><br>
<span>This soil treads me, that once I trod. My hand</span><br>
<span>Put these inscriptions here, half knowing why;</span><br>
<span>Last, and hence seeing all, of the passing band.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h5>LISBON, 1920.</h5>

<h2>ENGLISH<br>
POEMS</h2>
<h5>BY</h5>
<h3>FERNANDO PESSOA</h3>
<h4>III<br>
EPITHALAMIUM</h4>
<h5>LISBON</h5>
<h5>«OLISIPO», APARTADO 145</h5>
<h5>1921</h5>
<hr class="r5">
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>III</h4>
<h4>EPITHALAMIUM</h4>
<h4>I</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Set ope all shutters, that the day come in</span><br>
<span>Like a sea or a din!</span><br>
<span>Let not a nook of useless shade compel</span><br>
<span>Thoughts of the night, or tell</span><br>
<span>The mind's comparing that some things are sad,</span><br>
<span>For this day all are glad!</span><br>
<span>'Tis morn, 'tis open morn, the full sun is</span><br>
<span>Risen from out the abyss</span><br>
<span>Where last night lay beyond the unseen rim</span><br>
<span>Of the horizon dim.</span><br>
<span>Now is the bride awaking. Lo! she starts</span><br>
<span>To feel the day is home</span><br>
<span>Whose too-near night will put two different hearts</span><br>
<span>To beat as near as flesh can let them come.</span><br>
<span>Guess how she joys in her feared going, nor opes</span><br>
<span>Her eyes for fear of fearing at her joy.</span><br>
<span>Now is the pained arrival of all hopes.</span><br>
<span>With the half-thought she scarce knows how to toy.</span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span>Oh, let her wait a moment or a day</span><br>
<span>And prepare for the fray</span><br>
<span>For which her thoughts not ever quite prepare!</span><br>
<span>With the real day's arrival she's half wroth.</span><br>
<span>Though she wish what she wants, she yet doth stay.</span><br>
<span>Her dreams yet merged are</span><br>
<span>In the slow verge of sleep, which idly doth</span><br>
<span>The accurate hope of things remotely mar.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>II</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Part from the windows the small curtains set</span><br>
<span>Sight more than light to omit!</span><br>
<span>Look on the general fields, how bright they lie</span><br>
<span>Under the broad blue sky,</span><br>
<span>Cloudless, and the beginning of the heat</span><br>
<span>Does the sight half ill-treat!</span><br>
<span>The bride hath wakened. Lo! she feels her shaking</span><br>
<span>Heart better all her waking!</span><br>
<span>Her breasts are with fear's coldness inward clutched</span><br>
<span>And more felt on her grown,</span><br>
<span>That will by hands other than hers be touched</span><br>
<span>And will find lips sucking their budded crown.</span><br>
<span>Lo! the thought of the bridegroom's hands already</span><br>
<span>Feels her about where even her hands are shy,</span><br>
<span>And her thoughts shrink till they become unready.</span><br>
<span>She gathers up her body and still doth lie.</span><br>
<span>She vaguely lets her eyes feel opening.</span><br>
<span>In a fringed mist each thing</span><br>
<span>Looms, and the present day is truly clear</span><br>
<span>But to her sense of fear.</span><br>
<span>Like a hue, light lies on her lidded sight,</span><br>
<span>And she half hates the inevitable light.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>III</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Open the windows and the doors all wide</span><br>
<span>Lest aught of night abide,</span><br>
<span>Or, like a ship's trail in the sea, survive</span><br>
<span>What made it there to live!</span><br>
<span>She lies in bed half waiting that her wish</span><br>
<span>Grow bolder or more rich</span><br>
<span>To make her rise, or poorer, to oust fear,</span><br>
<span>And she rise as a common day were here.</span><br>
<span>That she would be a bride in bed with man</span><br>
<span>The parts where she is woman do insist</span><br>
<span>And send up messages that shame doth ban</span><br>
<span>From being dreamed but in a shapeless mist.</span><br>
<span>She opes her eyes, the ceiling sees above</span><br>
<span>Shutting the small alcove,</span><br>
<span>And thinks, till she must shut her eyes again,</span><br>
<span>Another ceiling she this night will know,</span><br>
<span>Another house, another bed, she lain</span><br>
<span>In a way she half guesses; so</span><br>
<span>She shuts her eyes to see not the room she</span><br>
<span>Soon will no longer see.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>IV</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Let the wide light come through the whole house now</span><br>
<span>Like a herald with brow</span><br>
<span>Garlanded round with roses and those leaves</span><br>
<span>That love for its love weaves!</span><br>
<span>Between her and the ceiling this day's ending</span><br>
<span>A man's weight will be bending.</span><br>
<span>Lo! with the thought her legs she twines, well knowing</span><br>
<span>A hand will part them then;</span><br>
<span>Fearing that entering in her, that allowing</span><br>
<span>That will make softness begin rude at pain.</span><br>
<span>If ye, glad sunbeams, are inhabited</span><br>
<span>By sprites or gnomes that dally with the day,</span><br>
<span>Whisper her, if she shrink that she'll be bled,</span><br>
<span>That love's large bower is doored in this small way.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>V</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Now will her grave of untorn maidenhood</span><br>
<span>Be dug in her small blood.</span><br>
<span>Assemble ye at that glad funeral</span><br>
<span>And weave her scarlet pall,</span><br>
<span>O pinings for the flesh of man that often</span><br>
<span>Did her secret hours soften</span><br>
<span>And take her willing and unwilling hand</span><br>
<span>Where pleasure starteth up.</span><br>
<span>Come forth, ye moted gnomes, unruly band,</span><br>
<span>That come so quick ye spill your brimming cup;</span><br>
<span>Ye that make youth young and flesh nice</span><br>
<span>And the glad spring and summer sun arise;</span><br>
<span>Ye by whose secret presence the trees grow</span><br>
<span>Green, and the flowers bud, and birds sing free,</span><br>
<span>When with the fury of a trembling glow</span><br>
<span>The bull climbs on the heifer mightily!</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>VI</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Sing at her window, ye heard early wings</span><br>
<span>In whose song joy's self sings!</span><br>
<span>Buzz in her room along her loss of sleep,</span><br>
<span>O small flies, tumble and creep</span><br>
<span>Along the counterpane and on her fingers</span><br>
<span>In mating pairs. She lingers.</span><br>
<span>Along her joined-felt legs a prophecy</span><br>
<span>Creeps like an inward hand.</span><br>
<span>Look how she tarries! Tell her: fear not glee!</span><br>
<span>Come up! Awake! Dress for undressing! Stand!</span><br>
<span>Look how the sun is altogether all!</span><br>
<span>Life hums around her senses petalled close.</span><br>
<span>Come up! Come up! Pleasure must thee befall!</span><br>
<span>Joy to be plucked, O yet ungathered rose!</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>VII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Now is she risen. Look how she looks down,</span><br>
<span>After her slow down-slid night-gown,</span><br>
<span>On her unspotted while of nakedness</span><br>
<span>Save where the beast's difference from her white frame</span><br>
<span>Hairily triangling black below doth shame</span><br>
<span>Her to-day's sight of it, till the caress</span><br>
<span>Of the chemise cover her body. Dress!</span><br>
<span>Stop not, sitting upon the bed's hard edge,</span><br>
<span>Stop not to wonder at by-and-bye, nor guess!</span><br>
<span>List to the rapid birds i'th' window ledge!</span><br>
<span>Up, up and washed! Lo! she is up half-gowned,</span><br>
<span>For she lacks hands to have power to button fit</span><br>
<span>The white symbolic wearing, and she's found</span><br>
<span>By her maids thus, that come to perfect it.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>VIII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Look how over her seeing-them-not her maids</span><br>
<span>Smile at each other their same thought of her!</span><br>
<span>Already is she deflowered in others' thoughts.</span><br>
<span>With curious carefulness of inlocked braids,</span><br>
<span>With hands that in the sun minutely stir,</span><br>
<span>One works her hair into concerted knots.</span><br>
<span>Another buttons tight the gown; her hand,</span><br>
<span>Touching the body's warmth of life, doth band</span><br>
<span>Her thoughts with the rude bridegroom's hand to be.</span><br>
<span>The first then, on the veil placed mistily,</span><br>
<span>Lays on her head, her own head sideways leaning,</span><br>
<span>The garland soon to have no meaning.</span><br>
<span>The other, at her knees, makes the white shoon</span><br>
<span>Fit close the trembling feet, and her eyes see</span><br>
<span>The stockinged leg, road upwards to that boon</span><br>
<span>Where all this day centres its revelry.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>IX</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Now is she gowned completely, her face won</span><br>
<span>To a flush. Look how the sun</span><br>
<span>Shines hot and how the creeper, loosed, doth strain</span><br>
<span>To hit the heated pane!</span><br>
<span>She is all white, all she's awaiting him.</span><br>
<span>Her eyes are bright and dim.</span><br>
<span>Her hands are cold, her lips are dry, her heart</span><br>
<span>Pants like a pursued hart.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>X</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Now is she issued. List how all speech pines</span><br>
<span>Then bursts into a wave of speech again!</span><br>
<span>Now is she issued out to where the guests</span><br>
<span>Look on her daring not to look at them.</span><br>
<span>The hot sun outside shines.</span><br>
<span>A sweaty oiliness of hot life rests</span><br>
<span>On the day's face this hour.</span><br>
<span>A mad joy's pent in each warm thing's hushed power.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XI</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Hang with festoons and wreaths and coronals</span><br>
<span>The corridors and halls!</span><br>
<span>Be there all round the sound of gay bells ringing!</span><br>
<span>Let there be echoing singing!</span><br>
<span>Pour out like a libation all your joy!</span><br>
<span>Shout, even ye children, little maid and boy</span><br>
<span>Whose belly yet unfurred yet whitely decks</span><br>
<span>A sexless thing of sex!</span><br>
<span>Shout out as if ye knew what joy this is</span><br>
<span>You clap at in such bliss!</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>This is the month and this the day.</span><br>
<span>Ye must not stay.</span><br>
<span>Sally ye out and in warm clusters move</span><br>
<span>To where beyond the trees the belfry's height</span><br>
<span>Does in the blue wide heaven a message prove,</span><br>
<span>Somewhat calm, of delight.</span><br>
<span>Now flushed and whispering loud sally ye out</span><br>
<span>To church! The sun pours on the ordered rout,</span><br>
<span>And all their following eyes clasp round the bride:</span><br>
<span>They feel like hands her bosom and her side;</span><br>
<span>Like the inside of the vestment next her skin,</span><br>
<span>They round her round and fold each crevice in;</span><br>
<span>They lift her skirts up, as to tease or woo</span><br>
<span>The cleft hid thing below;</span><br>
<span>And this they think at her peeps in their ways</span><br>
<span>And in their glances plays.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XIII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>No more, no more of church or feast, for these</span><br>
<span>Are outward to the day, like the green trees</span><br>
<span>That flank the road to church and the same road</span><br>
<span>Back from the church, under a higher sun trod.</span><br>
<span>These have no more part than a floor or wall</span><br>
<span>In the great day's true ceremonial.</span><br>
<span>The guests themselves, no less than they that wed,</span><br>
<span>Hold these as nought but corridors to bed.</span><br>
<span>So are all things, that between this and dark</span><br>
<span>Will be passed, a dim work</span><br>
<span>Of minutes, hours seen in a sleep, and dreamed</span><br>
<span>Untimed and wrongly deemed.</span><br>
<span>The bridal and the walk back and the feast</span><br>
<span>Are all for each a mist</span><br>
<span>Where he sees others through a blurred hot notion</span><br>
<span>Of drunk and veined emotion,</span><br>
<span>And a red race runs through his seeing and hearing,</span><br>
<span>A great carouse of dreams seen each on each,</span><br>
<span>Till their importunate careering</span><br>
<span>A stopped, half-hurting point of mad joy reach.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XIV</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>The bridegroom aches for the end of this and lusts</span><br>
<span>To know those paps in sucking gusts,</span><br>
<span>To put his first hand on that belly's hair</span><br>
<span>And feel for the lipped lair,</span><br>
<span>The fortress made but to be taken, for which</span><br>
<span>He feels the battering ram grow large and itch.</span><br>
<span>The trembling glad bride feels all the day hot</span><br>
<span>On that still cloistered spot</span><br>
<span>Where only her nightly maiden hand did feign</span><br>
<span>A pleasure's empty gain.</span><br>
<span>And, of the others, most will whisper at this,</span><br>
<span>Knowing the spurt it is;</span><br>
<span>And children yet, that watch with looking eyes,</span><br>
<span>Will now thrill to be wise</span><br>
<span>In flesh, and with big men and women act</span><br>
<span>The liquid tickling fact</span><br>
<span>For whose taste they'll in secret corners try</span><br>
<span>They scarce know what still dry.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XV</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Even ye, now old, that to this come as to</span><br>
<span>Your past, your own joy throw</span><br>
<span>Into the cup, and with the younger drink</span><br>
<span>That which now makes you think</span><br>
<span>Of what love was when love was. (For not now</span><br>
<span>Your winter thoughts allow).</span><br>
<span>Drink with the hot day, the bride's sad joy and</span><br>
<span>The bridegroom's haste inreined,</span><br>
<span>The memory of that day when ye were young</span><br>
<span>And, with great paeans sung</span><br>
<span>Along the surface of the depths of you,</span><br>
<span>You paired and the night saw</span><br>
<span>The day come in and you did still pant close,</span><br>
<span>And still the half-fallen flesh distending rose.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XVI</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>No matter now or past or future. Be</span><br>
<span>Lovers' age in your glee!</span><br>
<span>Give all your thoughts to this great muscled day</span><br>
<span>That like a courser tears</span><br>
<span>The bit of Time, to make night come and say</span><br>
<span>The maiden mount now her first rider bears!</span><br>
<span>Flesh pinched, flesh bit, flesh sucked, flesh girt around,</span><br>
<span>Flesh crushed and ground,</span><br>
<span>These things inflame your thoughts and make ye dim</span><br>
<span>In what ye say or seem!</span><br>
<span>Rage out in naked glances till ye fright</span><br>
<span>Your ague of delight,</span><br>
<span>In glances seeming clothes and thoughts to hate</span><br>
<span>That fleshes separate!</span><br>
<span>Stretch out your limbs to the warm day outside,</span><br>
<span>To feel it while it bide!</span><br>
<span>For the strong sun, the hot ground, the green grass,</span><br>
<span>Each far lake's dazzling glass,</span><br>
<span>And each one's flushed thought of the night to be</span><br>
<span>Are all one joy-hot unity.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XVII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>In a red bacchic surge of thoughts that beat</span><br>
<span>On the mad temples like an ire's amaze,</span><br>
<span>In a fury that hurts the eyes, and yet</span><br>
<span>Doth make all things clear with a blur around,</span><br>
<span>The whole group's soul like a glad drunkard sways</span><br>
<span>And bounds up from the ground!</span><br>
<span>Ay, though all these be common people heaping</span><br>
<span>To church, from church, the bridal keeping,</span><br>
<span>Yet all the satyrs and big pagan haunches</span><br>
<span>That in taut flesh delight and teats and paunches,</span><br>
<span>And whose course, trailing through the foliage, nears</span><br>
<span>The crouched nymph that half fears,</span><br>
<span>In invisible rush, behind, before</span><br>
<span>This decent group move, and with hot thoughts store</span><br>
<span>The passive souls round which their mesh they wind,</span><br>
<span>The while their rout, loud stumbling as if blind,</span><br>
<span>Makes the hilled earth wake echoing from her sleep</span><br>
<span>To the lust in their leap.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XVIII</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Io! Io! There runs a juice of pleasure's rage</span><br>
<span>Through these frames' mesh,</span><br>
<span>That now do really ache to strip and wage</span><br>
<span>Upon each others' flesh</span><br>
<span>The war that fills the womb and puts milk in</span><br>
<span>The teats a man did win,</span><br>
<span>The battle fought with rage to join and fit</span><br>
<span>And not to hurt or hit!</span><br>
<span>Io! Io! Be drunken like the day and hour!</span><br>
<span>Shout, laugh and overpower</span><br>
<span>With clamour your own thoughts, lest they a breath</span><br>
<span>Utter of age or death!</span><br>
<span>Now is all absolute youth, and the small pains</span><br>
<span>That thrill the filled veins</span><br>
<span>Themselves are edged in a great tickling joy</span><br>
<span>That halts ever ere it cloy.</span><br>
<span>Put out of mind all things save flesh and giving</span><br>
<span>The male milk that makes living!</span><br>
<span>Rake out great peals of joy like grass from ground</span><br>
<span>In your o'ergrown soul found!</span><br>
<span>Make your great rut dispersedly rejoice</span><br>
<span>With laugh or voice,</span><br>
<span>As if all earth, hot sky and tremulous air</span><br>
<span>A mighty cymbal were!</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XIX</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>Set the great Flemish hour aflame!</span><br>
<span>Your senses of all leisure maim!</span><br>
<span>Cast down with blows that joy even where they hurt</span><br>
<span>The hands that mock to avert!</span><br>
<span>All things pick up to bed that lead ye to</span><br>
<span>Be naked that ye woo!</span><br>
<span>Tear up, pluck up, like earth who treasure seek,</span><br>
<span>When the chest's ring doth peep,</span><br>
<span>The thoughts that cover thoughts of the acts of heat</span><br>
<span>This great day does intreat!</span><br>
<span>Now seem all hands pressing the paps as if</span><br>
<span>They meant them juice to give!</span><br>
<span>Now seem all things pairing on one another,</span><br>
<span>Hard flesh soft flesh to smother,</span><br>
<span>And hairy legs and buttocks balled to split</span><br>
<span>White legs mid which they shift.</span><br>
<span>Yet these mixed mere thoughts in each mind but speak</span><br>
<span>The day's push love to wreak,</span><br>
<span>The man's ache to have felt possession,</span><br>
<span>The woman's man to have on,</span><br>
<span>The abstract surge of life clearly to reach</span><br>
<span>The bodies' concrete beach.</span><br>
<span>Yet some work of this doth the real day don.</span><br>
<span>Now are skirts lifted in the servants' hall,</span><br>
<span>And the whored belly's stall</span><br>
<span>Ope to the horse that enters in a rush,</span><br>
<span>Half late, too near the gush.</span><br>
<span>And even now doth an elder guest emmesh</span><br>
<span>A flushed young girl in a dark nook apart,</span><br>
<span>And leads her slow to move his produced flesh.</span><br>
<span>Look how she likes with something in her heart</span><br>
<span>To feel her hand work the protruded dart!</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XX</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>But these are thoughts or promises or but</span><br>
<span>Half the purpose of rut,</span><br>
<span>And this is lust thought-of or futureless</span><br>
<span>Or used but lust to ease.</span><br>
<span>Do ye the circle true of love pretend,</span><br>
<span>And, what Nature, intend!</span><br>
<span>Do ye actually ache</span><br>
<span>The horse of lust by reins of life to bend</span><br>
<span>And pair in love for love's creating sake!</span><br>
<span>Bellow! Roar! Stallions be or bulls that fret</span><br>
<span>On their seed's hole to get!</span><br>
<span>Surge for that carnal complement that will</span><br>
<span>Your flesh's young juice thrill</span><br>
<span>To the wet mortised joints at which you meet</span><br>
<span>The coming life to greet,</span><br>
<span>In the tilled womb that will bulge till it do</span><br>
<span>The plenteous curve of spheric earth renew!</span><br>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h4>XXI</h4>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span>And ye, that wed to-day, guess these instincts</span><br>
<span>Of the concerted group in hints</span><br>
<span>Yourselves from Nature naturally have,</span><br>
<span>And your good future brave!</span><br>
<span>Close lips, nude arms, felt breasts and organ mighty,</span><br>
<span>Do your joy's night work rightly!</span><br>
<span>Teach them these things, O day of pomp of heat!</span><br>
<span>Leave them in thoughts such as must make the feat</span><br>
<span>Of flesh inevitable and natural as</span><br>
<span>Pissing when wish doth press!</span><br>
<span>Let them cling, kiss and fit</span><br>
<span>Together with natural wit,</span><br>
<span>And let the night, coming, teach them that use</span><br>
<span>For youth is in abuse!</span><br>
<span>Let them repeat the link, and pour and pour</span><br>
<span>Their pleasure till they can no more!</span><br>
<span>Ay, let the night watch over their repeated</span><br>
<span>Coupling in darkness, till thought's self, o'erheated,</span><br>
<span>Do fret and trouble, and sleep come on hurt frames,</span><br>
<span>And, mouthing each one's names,</span><br>
<span>They in each other's arms dream still of love</span><br>
<span>And something of it prove!</span><br>
<span>And, if they wake, teach them to recommence,</span><br>
<span>For an hour was far hence;</span><br>
<span>Till their contacted flesh, in heat o'erblent</span><br>
<span>With joy, sleep sick, while, spent</span><br>
<span>The stars, the sky pale in the East and shiver</span><br>
<span>Where light the night doth sever,</span><br>
<span>And with clamour of joy and life's young din</span><br>
<span>The warm new day come in.</span>
</div></div></div>
<p><br><br><br></p>
<h5>LISBON, 1913.</h5>

<h2>MEANTIME</h2>
<span>Far away, far away,</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Far away from here...</span><br/>
<span>There is no worry after joy</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Or away from fear</span><br/>
<span>Far away from here.</span><br/>
<span>Her lips were not very red,</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Nor her hair quite gold.</span><br/>
<span>Her hands played with rings.</span><br/>
<span class="i2">She did not let me hold</span><br/>
<span>Her hands playing with gold.</span><br/>
<span>She is something past,</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Far away from pain.</span><br/>
<span>Joy can touch her not, nor hope</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Enter her domain,</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Neither love in vain.</span><br/>
<span>Perhaps at some day beyond</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Shadows and light</span><br/>
<span>She will think of me and make</span><br/>
<span class="i2">All me a delight</span><br/>
<span class="i2">All away from sight.</span>

<h2>SPELL</h2>
<span>From the moonlit brink of dreams</span><br/>
<span class="i2">I stretch foiled hands to thee,</span><br/>
<span>O borne down other streams</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Than eye can think to see!</span><br/>
<span>O crowned with spirit-beams!</span><br/>
<span class="i2">O veiled spirituality!</span><br/>
<span>My dreams and thoughts abate</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Their pennons at thy feet,</span><br/>
<span>O angel born too late</span><br/>
<span class="i2">For fallen men to meet!</span><br/>
<span>In what new sensual state</span><br/>
<span class="i2">Could our twined lives feel sweet?</span><br/>
<span>What new emotion must</span><br/>
<span class="i2">I dream to think thee mine?</span><br/>
<span>What purity of lust?</span><br/>
<span class="i2">O tendrilled as a vine</span><br/>
<span>Around my caressed trust!</span><br/>
<span class="i2">O dream-pressed spirit-wine!</span>