<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>English Poems</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter">
		<section id="english-poems" epub:type="volume">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">English Poems</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">An early and very imperfect draft of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Antinous</i> was published in 1918. The present one is meant to annul and supersede that, from which it is essentially different. —<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Inscriptions</i> is now first published.</p>
			</header>
			<article id="antinous" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Antinous</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The rain outside was cold in Hadrian’s soul.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The boy lay dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the low couch, on whose denuded whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Hadrian’s eyes, whose sorrow was a dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shadowy light of Death’s eclipse was shed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The boy lay dead, and the day seemed a night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outside. The rain fell like a sick affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nature at her work in killing him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Memory of what he was gave no delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delight at what he was dead and dim.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O hands that once had clasped Hadrian’s warm hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose cold now found them cold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O hair bound erstwhile with the pressing bands!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O eyes half-diffidently bold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O bare female male-body such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a god’s likeness to humanity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O lips whose opening redness erst could touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lust’s seats with a live art’s variety!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O fingers skilled in things not to be told!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O tongue which, counter-tongued, made the blood bold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O complete regency of lust throned on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raged consciousness’s spilled suspension!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things are things that now must be no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rain is silent, and the Emperor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sinks by the couch. His grief is like a rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the gods take away the life they give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spoil the beauty they made live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He weeps and knows that every future age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is looking on him out of the to-be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His love is on a universal stage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand unborn eyes weep with his misery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Antinous is dead, is dead for ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is dead for ever and all loves lament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Venus herself, that was Adonis’ lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing him, that newly lived, now dead again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lends her old griefs renewal to be blent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Hadrian’s pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now is Apollo sad because the stealer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his white body is for ever cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No careful kisses on that nippled point</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covering his heart-beats’ silent place restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His life again to ope his eyes and feel her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presence along his veins Love’s fortress hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No warmth of his another’s warmth demands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will his hands behind his head no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Linked, in that posture giving all but hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the projected body hands implore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The rain falls, and he lies like one who hath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgotten all the gestures of his love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lies awake waiting their hot return.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all his arts and toys are now with Death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This human ice no way of heat can move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These ashes of a fire no flame can burn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Hadrian, what will now thy cold life be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What boots it to be lord of men and might?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His absence o’er thy visible empery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes like a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor is there morn in hopes of new delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now are thy nights widowed of love and kisses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now are thy days robbed of the night’s awaiting;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now have thy lips no purpose for thy blisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left but to speak the name that Death is mating</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With solitude and sorrow and affright.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thy vague hands grope, as if they had dropped joy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear that the rain ceases lift thy head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy raised glance take to the lovely boy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked he lies upon that memoried bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thine own hand he lies uncovered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was he wont thy dangling sense to cloy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And uncloy with more cloying, and annoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With newer uncloying till thy senses bled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His hand and mouth knew games to reinstal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire that thy worn spine was hurt to follow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes it seemed to thee that all was hollow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sense in each new straining of sucked lust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then still new turns of toying would he call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy nerves’ flesh, and thou wouldst tremble and fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back on thy cushions with thy mind’s sense hushed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Beautiful was my love, yet melancholy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had that art, that makes love captive wholly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of being slowly sad among lust’s rages.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now the Nile gave him up, the eternal Nile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his wet locks Death’s blue paleness wages</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now war upon our wishing with sad smile.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even as he thinks, the lust that is no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than a memory of lust revives and takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His senses by the hand, his felt flesh wakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all becomes again what ’twas before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dead body on the bed starts up and lives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And comes to lie with him, close, closer, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A creeping love-wise and invisible hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At every body-entrance to his lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispers caresses which flit off yet just</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remain enough to bleed his last nerve’s strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O sweet and cruel Parthian fugitives!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So he half rises, looking on his lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now can love nothing but what none know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vaguely, half-seeing what he doth behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He runs his cold lips all the body over.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so ice-senseless are his lips that, lo!,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He scarce tastes death from the dead body’s cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it seems both are dead or living both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love is still the presence and the mover.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then his lips cease on the other lips’ cold sloth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, there the wanting breath reminds his lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from beyond the gods hath moved a mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between him and this boy. His finger-tips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still idly searching o’er the body, list</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some flesh-response to their waking mood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But their love-question is not understood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The god is dead whose cult was to be kissed!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He lifts his hand up to where heaven should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cries on the mute gods to know his pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let your calm faces turn aside to his plea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O granting powers! He will yield up his reign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the still deserts he will parchèd live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the far barbarous roads beggar or slave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to his arms again the warm boy give!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forego that space ye meant to be his grave!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Take all the female loveliness of earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in one mound of death its remnant spill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, by sweet Ganymede, that Jove found worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And above Hebe did elect to fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cup at his high feasting, and instil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The friendlier love that fills the other’s dearth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clod of female embraces resolve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dust, O father of the gods, but spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This boy and his white body and golden hair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maybe thy better Ganymede thou feel’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he should be, and out of jealous care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Hadrian’s arms to thine his beauty steal’st.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He was a kitten playing with lust, playing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his own and with Hadrian’s, sometimes one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes two, now linking, now undone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now leaving lust, now lust’s high lusts delaying;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now eyeing lust not wide, but from askance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jumping round on lust’s half-unexpectance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now softly gripping, then with fury holding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now playfully playing, now seriously, now lying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By th’ side of lust looking at it, now spying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which way to take lust in his lust’s withholding.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus did the hours slide from their tangled hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from their mixed limbs the moments slip.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now were his arms dead leaves, now iron bands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now were his lips cups, now the things that sip;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now were his eyes too closed and now too looking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now were his uncontinuings frenzy working;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now were his arts a feather and now a whip.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That love they lived as a religion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offered to gods that come themselves to men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes he was adorned or made to don</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-vestures, then in statued nudity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did imitate some god that seems to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By marble’s accurate virtue men’s again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now was he Venus, white out of the seas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now was he Apollo, young and golden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now as Jove sate he in mock judgment over</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The presence at his feet of his slaved lover;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now was he an acted rite, by one beholden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ever-repositioned mysteries.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now he is something anyone can be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O stark negation of the thing it is!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O golden-haired moon-cold loveliness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too cold! too cold! and love as cold as he!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love through the memories of his love doth roam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As through a labyrinth, in sad madness glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now calls on his name and bids him come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now is smiling at his imaged coming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is i’th’ heart like faces in the gloaming⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mere shining shadows of the forms they had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The rain again like a vague pain arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And put the sense of wetness in the air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly did the Emperor suppose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw this room and all in it from far.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw the couch, the boy, and his own frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast down against the couch, and he became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A clearer presence to himself, and said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words unuttered, save to his soul’s dread:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I shall build thee a statue that will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the continued future evidence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my love and thy beauty and the sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That beauty giveth of divinity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Though death with subtle uncovering hands remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The apparel of life and empire from our love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet its nude statue, that thou dost inspirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All future times, whether they will’t or not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall, like a gift a forcing god hath brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inevitably inherit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ay, this thy statue shall I build, and set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the pinnacle of being thine, that Time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By its subtle dim crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will fear to eat it from life, or to fret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With war’s or envy’s rage from bulk and stone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fate cannot be that! Gods themselves, that make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things change, Fate’s own hand, that doth overtake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods themselves with darkness, will draw back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From marring thus thy statue and my boon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving the wide world hollow with thy lack.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This picture of our love will bridge the ages.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It will loom white out of the past and be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal, like a Roman victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every heart the future will give rages</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of not being our love’s contemporary.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet oh that this were needed not, and thou</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wert the red flower perfuming my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The garland on the brows of my delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The living flame on altars of my soul!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would all this were a thing thou mightest now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smile at from under thy death-mocking lids</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonder that I should so put a strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twixt me and gods for thy lost presence bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were there nought in this but my empty dole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy awakening smile half to condole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what my dreaming pain to hope forbids.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus went he, like a lover who is waiting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From place to place in his dim doubting mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now was his hope a great intention fating</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its wish to being, now felt he was blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some point of his seen wish undefined.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When love meets death we know not what to feel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When death foils love we know not what to know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now did his doubt hope, now did his hope doubt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now what his wish dreamed the dream’s sense did flout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to a sullen emptiness congeal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then again the gods fanned love’s darkening glow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thy death has given me a higher lust⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A flesh-lust raging for eternity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On mine imperial fate I set my trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the high gods, that made me emperor be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will not annul from a more real life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wish that thou should’st live for e’er and stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fleshly presence on their better land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More lovely yet not lovelier, for there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No things impossible our wishes mar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor pain our hearts with change and time and strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Love, love, my love! thou art already a god.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This thought of mine, which I a wish believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is no wish, but a sight, to me allowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the great gods, that love and can give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mortal hearts, under the shape of wishes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wishes having undiscovered reaches⁠—,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vision of the real things beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our life-imprisoned life, our sense-bound sense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay, what I wish thee to be thou art now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already. Already on Olympic ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou walkest and art perfect, yet art thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou needst no excess of thee to don</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perfect to be, being perfection.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My heart is singing like a morning bird.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great hope from the gods comes down to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bids my heart to subtler sense be stirred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think not that strange evil of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to think thee mortal would be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My love, my love, my god-love! Let me kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On thy cold lips thy hot lips now immortal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greeting thee at Death’s portal’s happiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to the gods Death’s portal is Life’s portal.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Were no Olympus yet for thee, my love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would make thee one, where thou sole god mightst prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I thy sole adorer, glad to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy sole adorer through infinity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were a universe divine enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love and me and what to me thou art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have thee is a thing made of gods’ stuff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to look on thee eternity’s best part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But this is true and mine own art: the god</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art now is a body made by me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, if thou art now flesh reality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond where men age and night cometh still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis to my love’s great making power thou owest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That life thou on thy memory bestowest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mak’st it carnal. Had my love not held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An empire of my mighty legioned will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou to gods’ consort hadst not been compelled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My love that found thee, when it found thee did</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But find its own true body and exact look.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore when now thy memory I bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become a god where gods are, I but move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To death’s high column’s top the shape it took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set it there for vision of all love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O love, my love, put up with my strong will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of loving to Olympus, be thou there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The latest god, whose honey-coloured hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes divine eyes! As thou wert on earth, still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In heaven bodifully be and roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A prisoner of that happiness of home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With elder gods, while I on earth do make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A statue for thy deathlessness’ seen sake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet thy true deathless statue I shall build</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be no stone thing, but that same regret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which our love’s eternity is willed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One side of that is thou, as gods see thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, and the other, here, thy memory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sorrow will make that men’s god, and set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy naked memory on the parapet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That looks upon the seas of future times.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some will say all our love was but our crimes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others against our names the knives will whet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their glad hate of beauty’s beauty, and make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our names a base of heap whereon to rake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The names of all our brothers with quick scorn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet will our presence, like eternal Morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever return at Beauty’s hour, and shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the East of Love, in light to enshrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New gods to come, the lacking world to adorn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“All that thou art now is thyself and I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our dual presence has its unity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that perfection of body which my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By loving it, became, and did from life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raise into godness, calm above the strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of times, and changing passions far above.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But since men see more with the eyes than soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still I in stone shall utter this great dole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still, eager that men hunger by thy presence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall to marble carry this regret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in my heart like a great star is set.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, even in stone, our love shall stand so great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy statue of us, like a god’s fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our love’s incarnate and discarnate essence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, like a trumpet reaching over seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And going from continent to continent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our love shall speak its joy and woe, death-blent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over infinities and eternities.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And here, memory or statue, we shall stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still the same one, as we were hand in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor felt each other’s hand for feeling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men still will see me when thy sense they take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The entire gods might pass, in the vast wheeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the globed ages. If but for thy sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, being theirs, hadst gone with their gone band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would return, as they had slept to wake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then the end of days when Jove were born again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Ganymede again pour at his feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would see our dual soul from death released</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And recreated unto joy, fear, pain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that love doth contain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life⁠—all the beauty that doth make a lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love’s own true love, at the spell amazed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if our very memory wore to dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By some gods’ race of the end of ages must</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our dual unity again be raised.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It rained still. But slow-treading night came in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Closing the weary eyelids of each sense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very consciousness of self and soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grew, like a landscape through dim raining, dim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Emperor lay still, so still that now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He half forgot where now he lay, or whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sorrow that was still salt on his lips.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All had been something very far, a scroll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rolled up. The things he felt were like the rim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That haloes round the moon when the night weeps.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His head was bowed into his arms, and they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the low couch, foreign to his sense, lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His closed eyes seemed open to him, and seeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The naked floor, dark, cold, sad and unmeaning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hurting breath was all his sense could know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the falling darkness the wind rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell; a voice swooned in the courts below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Emperor slept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i11">The gods came now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bore something away, no sense knows how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On unseen arms of power and repose.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="inscriptions" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Inscriptions</h3>
				<section id="inscriptions-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>
						<span>We pass and dream. Earth smiles. Virtue is rare.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Age, duty, gods weigh on our conscious bliss.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hope for the best and for the worst prepare.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sum of purposed wisdom speaks in this.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Me, Chloe, a maid, the mighty fates have given,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who was nought to them, to the peopled shades.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus the gods will. My years were but twice seven.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am forgotten in my distant glades.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>
						<span>From my villa on the hill I long looked down</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the muttering town;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then one day drew (life sight-sick, dull hope shed)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My toga o’er my head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(The simplest gesture being the greatest thing)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a raised wing.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Not Cecrops kept my bees. My olives bore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oil like the sun. My several herd lowed far.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The breathing traveller rested by my door.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wet earth smells still; dead my nostrils are.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I conquered. Far barbarians hear my name.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men were dice in my game,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to my throw myself did lesser come:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I threw dice, Fate the sum.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Some were as loved, some as prizes prized.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A natural wife to the fed man my mate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I was sufficient to whom I sufficed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I moved, slept, bore and aged without a fate.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I put by pleasure like an alien bowl.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stern, separate, mine, I looked towards where gods seem.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From behind me the common shadow stole.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dreaming that I slept not, I slept my dream.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-8" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Scarce five years passed ere I passed too.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death came and took the child he found.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No god spared, or fate smiled at, so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Small hands, clutching so little round.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-9" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h4>
					<p>
						<span>There is a silence where the town was old.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grass grows where not a memory lies below.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We that dined loud are sand. The tale is told.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The far hoofs hush. The inn’s last light doth go.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-10" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h4>
					<p>
						<span>We, that both lie here, loved. This denies us.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My lost hand crumbles where her breasts’ lack is.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love’s known, each lover is anonymous.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We both felt fair. Kiss, for that was our kiss.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-11" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I for my city’s want fought far and fell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I could not tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What she did want, that knew she wanted me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her walls be free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her speech keep such as I spoke, and men die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she die not, as I.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-12" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Life lived us, not we life. We, as bees sip,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Looked, talked and had. Trees grow as we did last.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We loved the gods but as we see a ship.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Never aware of being aware, we passed.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-13" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>The work is done. The hammer is laid down.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The artisans, that built the slow-grown town,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have been succeeded by those who still built.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All this is something lack-of-something screening.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The thought whole has no meaning</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But lies by Time’s wall like a pitcher spilt.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="inscriptions-14" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>This covers me, that erst had the blue sky.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This soil treads me, that once I trod. My hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put these inscriptions here, half knowing why;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Last, and hence seeing all, of the passing band.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="epithalamium" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Epithalamium</h3>
				<section id="epithalamium-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Set ope all shutters, that the day come in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a sea or a din!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let not a nook of useless shade compel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thoughts of the night, or tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mind’s comparing that some things are sad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For this day all are glad!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis morn, ’tis open morn, the full sun is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Risen from out the abyss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where last night lay beyond the unseen rim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the horizon dim.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now is the bride awaking. Lo! she starts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To feel the day is home</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose too-near night will put two different hearts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To beat as near as flesh can let them come.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Guess how she joys in her feared going, nor opes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her eyes for fear of fearing at her joy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now is the pained arrival of all hopes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the half-thought she scarce knows how to toy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Oh, let her wait a moment or a day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And prepare for the fray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which her thoughts not ever quite prepare!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the real day’s arrival she’s half wroth.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though she wish what she wants, she yet doth stay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her dreams yet merged are</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the slow verge of sleep, which idly doth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The accurate hope of things remotely mar.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Part from the windows the small curtains set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sight more than light to omit!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look on the general fields, how bright they lie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under the broad blue sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cloudless, and the beginning of the heat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Does the sight half ill-treat!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bride hath wakened. Lo! she feels her shaking</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heart better all her waking!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her breasts are with fear’s coldness inward clutched</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And more felt on her grown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That will by hands other than hers be touched</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And will find lips sucking their budded crown.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lo! the thought of the bridegroom’s hands already</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Feels her about where even her hands are shy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And her thoughts shrink till they become unready.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She gathers up her body and still doth lie.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She vaguely lets her eyes feel opening.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a fringed mist each thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Looms, and the present day is truly clear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to her sense of fear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a hue, light lies on her lidded sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she half hates the inevitable light.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Open the windows and the doors all wide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lest aught of night abide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or, like a ship’s trail in the sea, survive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What made it there to live!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She lies in bed half waiting that her wish</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grow bolder or more rich</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make her rise, or poorer, to oust fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she rise as a common day were here.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she would be a bride in bed with man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The parts where she is woman do insist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And send up messages that shame doth ban</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From being dreamed but in a shapeless mist.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She opes her eyes, the ceiling sees above</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shutting the small alcove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thinks, till she must shut her eyes again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another ceiling she this night will know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another house, another bed, she lain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a way she half guesses; so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She shuts her eyes to see not the room she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soon will no longer see.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Let the wide light come through the whole house now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a herald with brow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Garlanded round with roses and those leaves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That love for its love weaves!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between her and the ceiling this day’s ending</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A man’s weight will be bending.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lo! with the thought her legs she twines, well knowing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A hand will part them then;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fearing that entering in her, that allowing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That will make softness begin rude at pain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If ye, glad sunbeams, are inhabited</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By sprites or gnomes that dally with the day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whisper her, if she shrink that she’ll be bled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That love’s large bower is doored in this small way.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Now will her grave of untorn maidenhood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be dug in her small blood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assemble ye at that glad funeral</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And weave her scarlet pall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O pinings for the flesh of man that often</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did her secret hours soften</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And take her willing and unwilling hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where pleasure starteth up.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come forth, ye moted gnomes, unruly band,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That come so quick ye spill your brimming cup;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye that make youth young and flesh nice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the glad spring and summer sun arise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye by whose secret presence the trees grow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Green, and the flowers bud, and birds sing free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When with the fury of a trembling glow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bull climbs on the heifer mightily!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Sing at her window, ye heard early wings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In whose song joy’s self sings!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Buzz in her room along her loss of sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O small flies, tumble and creep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Along the counterpane and on her fingers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In mating pairs. She lingers.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Along her joined-felt legs a prophecy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Creeps like an inward hand.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look how she tarries! Tell her: fear not glee!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come up! Awake! Dress for undressing! Stand!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look how the sun is altogether all!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Life hums around her senses petalled close.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Come up! Come up! Pleasure must thee befall!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Joy to be plucked, O yet ungathered rose!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Now is she risen. Look how she looks down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After her slow down-slid night-gown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On her unspotted while of nakedness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save where the beast’s difference from her white frame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hairily triangling black below doth shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her to-day’s sight of it, till the caress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the chemise cover her body. Dress!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stop not, sitting upon the bed’s hard edge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stop not to wonder at by-and-bye, nor guess!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>List to the rapid birds i’th’ window ledge!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up, up and washed! Lo! she is up half-gowned,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For she lacks hands to have power to button fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The white symbolic wearing, and she’s found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By her maids thus, that come to perfect it.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-8" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Look how over her seeing-them-not her maids</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smile at each other their same thought of her!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Already is she deflowered in others’ thoughts.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With curious carefulness of inlocked braids,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With hands that in the sun minutely stir,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One works her hair into concerted knots.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another buttons tight the gown; her hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Touching the body’s warmth of life, doth band</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her thoughts with the rude bridegroom’s hand to be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The first then, on the veil placed mistily,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lays on her head, her own head sideways leaning,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The garland soon to have no meaning.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other, at her knees, makes the white shoon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fit close the trembling feet, and her eyes see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stockinged leg, road upwards to that boon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where all this day centres its revelry.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-9" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Now is she gowned completely, her face won</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To a flush. Look how the sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shines hot and how the creeper, loosed, doth strain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hit the heated pane!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She is all white, all she’s awaiting him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her eyes are bright and dim.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her hands are cold, her lips are dry, her heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pants like a pursued hart.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-10" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Now is she issued. List how all speech pines</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then bursts into a wave of speech again!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now is she issued out to where the guests</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look on her daring not to look at them.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The hot sun outside shines.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sweaty oiliness of hot life rests</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the day’s face this hour.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mad joy’s pent in each warm thing’s hushed power.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-11" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Hang with festoons and wreaths and coronals</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The corridors and halls!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be there all round the sound of gay bells ringing!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let there be echoing singing!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pour out like a libation all your joy!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shout, even ye children, little maid and boy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose belly yet unfurred yet whitely decks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sexless thing of sex!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shout out as if ye knew what joy this is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You clap at in such bliss!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-12" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>This is the month and this the day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye must not stay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sally ye out and in warm clusters move</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To where beyond the trees the belfry’s height</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Does in the blue wide heaven a message prove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Somewhat calm, of delight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now flushed and whispering loud sally ye out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To church! The sun pours on the ordered rout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all their following eyes clasp round the bride:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They feel like hands her bosom and her side;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like the inside of the vestment next her skin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They round her round and fold each crevice in;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They lift her skirts up, as to tease or woo</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cleft hid thing below;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And this they think at her peeps in their ways</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in their glances plays.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-13" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>No more, no more of church or feast, for these</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are outward to the day, like the green trees</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That flank the road to church and the same road</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Back from the church, under a higher sun trod.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These have no more part than a floor or wall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the great day’s true ceremonial.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The guests themselves, no less than they that wed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hold these as nought but corridors to bed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So are all things, that between this and dark</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will be passed, a dim work</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of minutes, hours seen in a sleep, and dreamed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Untimed and wrongly deemed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bridal and the walk back and the feast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are all for each a mist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where he sees others through a blurred hot notion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of drunk and veined emotion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And a red race runs through his seeing and hearing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A great carouse of dreams seen each on each,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till their importunate careering</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A stopped, half-hurting point of mad joy reach.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-14" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>The bridegroom aches for the end of this and lusts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know those paps in sucking gusts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To put his first hand on that belly’s hair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feel for the lipped lair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fortress made but to be taken, for which</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He feels the battering ram grow large and itch.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The trembling glad bride feels all the day hot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On that still cloistered spot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where only her nightly maiden hand did feign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A pleasure’s empty gain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, of the others, most will whisper at this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knowing the spurt it is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And children yet, that watch with looking eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will now thrill to be wise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In flesh, and with big men and women act</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The liquid tickling fact</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For whose taste they’ll in secret corners try</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They scarce know what still dry.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-15" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Even ye, now old, that to this come as to</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your past, your own joy throw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the cup, and with the younger drink</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That which now makes you think</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of what love was when love was. (For not now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your winter thoughts allow).</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drink with the hot day, the bride’s sad joy and</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bridegroom’s haste inreined,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The memory of that day when ye were young</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, with great paeans sung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Along the surface of the depths of you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You paired and the night saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The day come in and you did still pant close,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And still the half-fallen flesh distending rose.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-16" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>No matter now or past or future. Be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lovers’ age in your glee!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give all your thoughts to this great muscled day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That like a courser tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bit of Time, to make night come and say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The maiden mount now her first rider bears!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flesh pinched, flesh bit, flesh sucked, flesh girt around,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flesh crushed and ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These things inflame your thoughts and make ye dim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In what ye say or seem!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rage out in naked glances till ye fright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your ague of delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In glances seeming clothes and thoughts to hate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That fleshes separate!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stretch out your limbs to the warm day outside,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To feel it while it bide!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the strong sun, the hot ground, the green grass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each far lake’s dazzling glass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And each one’s flushed thought of the night to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are all one joy-hot unity.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-17" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>In a red bacchic surge of thoughts that beat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On the mad temples like an ire’s amaze,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a fury that hurts the eyes, and yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth make all things clear with a blur around,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The whole group’s soul like a glad drunkard sways</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bounds up from the ground!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ay, though all these be common people heaping</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To church, from church, the bridal keeping,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet all the satyrs and big pagan haunches</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in taut flesh delight and teats and paunches,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whose course, trailing through the foliage, nears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The crouched nymph that half fears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In invisible rush, behind, before</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This decent group move, and with hot thoughts store</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The passive souls round which their mesh they wind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The while their rout, loud stumbling as if blind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Makes the hilled earth wake echoing from her sleep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the lust in their leap.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-18" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Io! Io! There runs a juice of pleasure’s rage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through these frames’ mesh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That now do really ache to strip and wage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon each others’ flesh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The war that fills the womb and puts milk in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The teats a man did win,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The battle fought with rage to join and fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not to hurt or hit!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Io! Io! Be drunken like the day and hour!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shout, laugh and overpower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With clamour your own thoughts, lest they a breath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Utter of age or death!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now is all absolute youth, and the small pains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thrill the filled veins</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Themselves are edged in a great tickling joy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That halts ever ere it cloy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put out of mind all things save flesh and giving</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The male milk that makes living!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rake out great peals of joy like grass from ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In your o’ergrown soul found!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make your great rut dispersedly rejoice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With laugh or voice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if all earth, hot sky and tremulous air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mighty cymbal were!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-19" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Set the great Flemish hour aflame!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your senses of all leisure maim!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cast down with blows that joy even where they hurt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The hands that mock to avert!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All things pick up to bed that lead ye to</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be naked that ye woo!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tear up, pluck up, like earth who treasure seek,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the chest’s ring doth peep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The thoughts that cover thoughts of the acts of heat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This great day does intreat!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now seem all hands pressing the paps as if</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They meant them juice to give!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now seem all things pairing on one another,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hard flesh soft flesh to smother,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hairy legs and buttocks balled to split</span>
						<br/>
						<span>White legs mid which they shift.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet these mixed mere thoughts in each mind but speak</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The day’s push love to wreak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The man’s ache to have felt possession,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The woman’s man to have on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The abstract surge of life clearly to reach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bodies’ concrete beach.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet some work of this doth the real day don.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now are skirts lifted in the servants’ hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the whored belly’s stall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ope to the horse that enters in a rush,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Half late, too near the gush.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And even now doth an elder guest emmesh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A flushed young girl in a dark nook apart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And leads her slow to move his produced flesh.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look how she likes with something in her heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To feel her hand work the protruded dart!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-20" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h4>
					<p>
						<span>But these are thoughts or promises or but</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Half the purpose of rut,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And this is lust thought-of or futureless</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or used but lust to ease.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do ye the circle true of love pretend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, what Nature, intend!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do ye actually ache</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The horse of lust by reins of life to bend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pair in love for love’s creating sake!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bellow! Roar! Stallions be or bulls that fret</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On their seed’s hole to get!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Surge for that carnal complement that will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your flesh’s young juice thrill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the wet mortised joints at which you meet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The coming life to greet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the tilled womb that will bulge till it do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The plenteous curve of spheric earth renew!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="epithalamium-21" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>And ye, that wed to-day, guess these instincts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the concerted group in hints</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yourselves from Nature naturally have,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And your good future brave!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Close lips, nude arms, felt breasts and organ mighty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do your joy’s night work rightly!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Teach them these things, O day of pomp of heat!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leave them in thoughts such as must make the feat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of flesh inevitable and natural as</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pissing when wish doth press!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let them cling, kiss and fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Together with natural wit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let the night, coming, teach them that use</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For youth is in abuse!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let them repeat the link, and pour and pour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their pleasure till they can no more!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ay, let the night watch over their repeated</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Coupling in darkness, till thought’s self, o’erheated,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do fret and trouble, and sleep come on hurt frames,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, mouthing each one’s names,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They in each other’s arms dream still of love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And something of it prove!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, if they wake, teach them to recommence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For an hour was far hence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till their contacted flesh, in heat o’erblent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With joy, sleep sick, while, spent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stars, the sky pale in the East and shiver</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where light the night doth sever,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with clamour of joy and life’s young din</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The warm new day come in.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
