<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>35 Sonnets</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter">
		<section id="thirty-five-sonnets" epub:type="volume">
			<h2 epub:type="title">35 Sonnets</h2>
			<article id="sonnet-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whether we write or speak or do but look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are ever unapparent. What we are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot be transfused into word or book.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our soul from us is infinitely far.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>However much we give our thoughts the will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be our soul and gesture it abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our hearts are incommunicable still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In what we show ourselves we are ignored.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The abyss from soul to soul cannot be bridged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By any skill of thought or trick of seeming.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto our very selves we are abridged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we would utter to our thought our being.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We are our dreams of ourselves, souls by gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And each to each other dreams of others’ dreams.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If that apparent part of life’s delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our tingled flesh-sense circumscribes were seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By aught save reflex and co-carnal sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy, flesh and life might prove but a gross screen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply Truth’s body is no eyable being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appearance even as appearance lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply our close, dark, vague, warm sense of seeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the choked vision of blindfolded eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefrom what comes to thought’s sense of life? Nought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All is either the irrational world we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or some aught-else whose being-unknown doth rot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its use for our thought’s use. Whence taketh me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A qualm-like ache of life, a body-deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Soul-hate of what we seek and what we weep.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I do think my meanest line shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More in Time’s use than my creating whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That future eyes more clearly shall feel me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this inked page than in my direct soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I conjecture put to make me seeing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good readers of me in some aftertime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thankful to some idea of my being</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doth not even my with gone true soul rime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An anger at the essence of the world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes this thus, or thinkable this wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes my soul by the throat and makes it hurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In nightly horrors of despaired surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And I become the mere sense of a rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That lacks the very words whose waste might ’suage.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I could not think of thee as piecèd rot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet such thou wert, for thou hadst been long dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thou liv’dst entire in my seeing thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what thou wert in me had never fled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, I had fixed the moments of thy beauty⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy ebbing smile, thy kiss’s readiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And memory had taught my heart the duty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know thee ever at that deathlessness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I came where thou wert laid, and saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The natural flowers ignoring thee sans blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the encroaching grass, with casual flaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Framing the stone to age where was thy name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I knew not how to feel, nor what to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Towards thy fate’s material secrecy.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How can I think, or edge my thoughts to action,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the miserly press of each day’s need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aches to a narrowness of spilled distraction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul appalled at the world’s work’s time-greed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can I pause my thoughts upon the task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul was born to think that it must do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When every moment has a thought to ask</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fit the immediate craving of its cue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coin I’d heap for marrying my Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And build our home i’th’ greater Time-to-be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Becomes dissolved by needs of each day’s use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I feel beggared of infinity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like a true-Christian sinner, each day flesh-driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By his own act to forfeit his wished heaven.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As a bad orator, badly o’er-book-skilled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth overflow his purpose with made heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like a clock, winds with withoutness willed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What should have been an inner instinct’s feat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as a prose-wit, harshly poet turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lacking the subtler music in his measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With useless care labours but to be spurned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Courting in alien speech the Muse’s pleasure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I study how to love or how to hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Estranged by consciousness from sentiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a thought feeling forced to be sedate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even when the feeling’s nature is violent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As who would learn to swim without the river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When nearest to the trick, as far as ever.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thy words are torture to me, that scarce grieve thee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That entire death shall null my entire thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I feel torture, not that I believe thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that I cannot disbelieve thee not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall that of me that now contains the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be by the very contained stars survived?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus were Fate all unjust. Yet what truth bars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An all unjust Fate’s truth from being believed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conjecture cannot fit to the seen world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A garment of its thought untorn or covering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or with its stuffed garb forge an otherworld</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without itself its dead deceit discovering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So, all being possible, an idle thought may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Less idle thoughts, self-known no truer, dismay.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How many masks wear we, and undermasks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon our countenance of soul, and when,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If for self-sport the soul itself unmasks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knows it the last mask off and the face plain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The true mask feels no inside to the mask</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But looks out of the mask by co-masked eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever consciousness begins the task</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The task’s accepted use to sleepness ties.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a child frighted by its mirrored faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our souls, that children are, being thought-losing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foist otherness upon their seen grimaces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And get a whole world on their forgot causing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, when a thought would unmask our soul’s masking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Itself goes not unmasked to the unmasking.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Oh to be idle loving idleness!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am idle all in hate of me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever in action’s dream, in the false stress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of purposed action never set to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a fierce beast self-penned in a bait-lair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My will to act binds with excess my action,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not-acting coils the thought with raged despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And acting rage doth paint despair distraction.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like someone sinking in a treacherous sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each gesture to deliver sinks the more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The struggle avails not, and to raise no hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though but more slowly useless, we’ve no power.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hence live I the dead life each day doth bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Repurposed for next day’s repurposing.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As to a child, I talked my heart asleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With empty promise of the coming day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it slept rather for my words made sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than from a thought of what their sense did say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For did it care for sense, would it not wake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And question closer to the morrow’s pleasure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would it not edge nearer my words, to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The promise in the meting of its measure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, if it slept, ’twas that it cared but for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The present sleepy use of promised joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thanking the fruit but for the forecome flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the less active senses best enjoy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus with deceit do I detain the heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of which deceit’s self knows itself a part.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Like to a ship that storms urge on its course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By its own trials our soul is surer made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very things that make the voyage worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do make it better; its peril is its aid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as the storm drives from the storm, our heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the peril disimperilled grows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A port is near the more from port we part⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The port whereto our driven direction goes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we reap knowledge to cross-profit, this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From storms we learn, when the storm’s height doth drive⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the black presence of its violence is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pushing promise of near far blue skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Learn we but how to have the pilot-skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And the storm’s very might shall mate our will.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As the lone, frighted user of a night-road</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly turns round, nothing to detect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet on his fear’s sense keepeth still the load</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that brink-nothing he doth but suspect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the cold terror moves to him more near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of something that from nothing casts a spell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when he moves, to fright more is not there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And’s only visible when invisible</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I upon the world turn round in thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing viewing do no courage take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my more terror, from no seen cause got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that felt corporate emptiness forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And draw my sense of mystery’s horror from</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Seeing no mystery’s mystery alone.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I should be asleep to mine own voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In telling thee how much thy love’s my dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I find me listening to myself, the noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my words othered in my hearing them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet wonder not: this is the poet’s soul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could not tell thee well of how I love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loved I not less by knowing it, were all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My self my love and no thought love to prove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What consciousness makes more by consciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It makes less, for it makes it less itself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sense of love could not my love rich-dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did it not for it spend love’s own love-pelf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Poet’s love’s this (as in these words I prove thee):</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I love my love for thee more than I love thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>We are born at sunset and we die ere morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the whole darkness of the world we know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can we guess its truth, to darkness born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The obscure consequence of absent glow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the stars do teach us light. We grasp</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their scattered smallnesses with thoughts that stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though their eyes look through night’s complete mask,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet they speak not the features of the day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should these small denials of the whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than the black whole the pleased eyes attract?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why what it calls “worth” does the captive soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Add to the small and from the large detract?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So, out of light’s love wishing it night’s stretch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A nightly thought of day we darkly reach.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Like a bad suitor desperate and trembling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the mixed sense of being not loved and loving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who with feared longing half would know, dissembling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what he’d wish proved what he fears soon proving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I look with inner eyes afraid to look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet perplexed into looking, at the worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This verse may have and wonder, of my book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what thoughts shall’t in alien hearts give birth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as he who doth love, and, loving, hopes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, hoping, fears, fears to put proof to proof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his mind for possible proofs gropes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delaying the true proof, lest the real thing scoff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I daily live, i’th’ fame I dream to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But by my thought of others’ thought of me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>We never joy enjoy to that full point</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regret doth wish joy had enjoyèd been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor have the strength regret to disappoint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Recalling not past joy’s thought, but its mien.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet joy was joy when it enjoyèd was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after-enjoyed when as joy recalled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It must have been joy ere its joy did pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, recalled, joy still, since its being-past galled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! All this is useless, for joy’s in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoying, not in thinking of enjoying.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its mere thought-mirroring gainst itself doth sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By mere reflecting solid life destroying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet the more thought we take to thought to prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">It must not think, doth further from joy move.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My love, and not I, is the egoist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love for thee loves itself more than thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay, more than me, in whom it doth exist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And makes me live that it may feed on me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the country of bridges the bridge is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More real than the shores it doth unsever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in our world, all of Relation, this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is true⁠—that truer is Love than either lover.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This thought therefore comes lightly to Doubt’s door⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If we, seeing substance of this world, are not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mere Intervals, God’s Absence and no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hollows in real Consciousness and Thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And if ’tis possible to Thought to bear this fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why should it not be possible to Truth?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-18" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Indefinite space, which, by co-substance night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one black mystery two void mysteries blends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stray stars, whose innumerable light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repeats one mystery till conjecture ends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stream of time, known by birth-bursting bubbles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gulf of silence, empty even of nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought’s high-walled maze, which the outed owner troubles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the string’s lost and the plan forgot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I think on this and that here I stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thinker of these thoughts, emptily wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding up to my thinking my thing-hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looking at it with thought-alien eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The prayer of my wonder looketh past</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The universal darkness lone and vast.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Beauty and love let no one separate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom exact Nature did to each other fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving to Beauty love as finishing fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Love beauty as true colour of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let he but friend be who the soul finds fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let none love outside the body’s thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the seen couple’s togetherness shall bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truth to the beauty each in the other sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could but love thee out of mockery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love and thee and mine own ugliness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore thy beauty I sing and wish not thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thanking the Gods I long not out of place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lest, like a slave that for kings’ robes doth long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Obtained, shall with mere wearing do them wrong.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-20" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When in the widening circle of rebirth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a new flesh my travelled soul shall come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And try again the unremembered earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the old sadness for the immortal home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I revisit these same differing fields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cull the old new flowers with the same sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That some small breath of foiled remembrance yields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of more age than my days in this pretence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I again regret strange faces lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the present memory is forgot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but in unseen bulks of vagueness tossed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the closed sea and black night of Thought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Were thy face one, what sweetness will’t not be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Though by blind feeling, to remember thee!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-21" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thought was born blind, but Thought knows what is seeing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its careful touch, deciphering forms from shapes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still suggests form as aught whose proper being</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mere finding touch with erring darkness drapes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet whence, except from guessed sight, does touch teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That touch is but a close and empty sense?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How does mere touch, self-uncontented, reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some truer sense’s whole intelligence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thing once touched, if touch be now omitted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stands yet in memory real and outward known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the untouching memory of touch is fitted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sense of a sense whereby far things are shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So, by touch of untouching, wrongly aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Touch’ thought of seeing sees not things but Sight.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-22" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My soul is a stiff pageant, man by man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some Egyptian art than Egypt older,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found in some tomb whose rite no guess can scan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all things else to coloured dust did moulder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er its sense may mean, its age is twin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that of priesthoods whose feet stood near God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When knowledge was so great that ’twas a sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And man’s mere soul too man for its abode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I ask what means that pageant I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would look at it suddenly, I lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sense I had of seeing it, nor can try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again to look, nor hath my memory a use</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That seems recalling, save that it recalls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">An emptiness of having seen those walls.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-23" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Even as upon a low and cloud-domed day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When clouds are one cloud till the horizon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our thinking senses deem the sun away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say “ ’tis sunless” and “there is no sun”;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the very day they wrong truth by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is of the unseen sun’s effluent essence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very words do give themselves the lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very thought of absence comes from presence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so deem we through Good of what is evil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He speaks of light that speaks of absent light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And absent god, becoming present devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is still the absent god by essence’ right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The withdrawn cause by being withdrawn doth get</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(Being thereby cause still) the denied effect.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-24" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Something in me was born before the stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw the sun begin from far away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our yellow, local day on its wont jars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it hath communed with an absolute day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through my Thought’s night, as a worn robe’s heard trail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have never seen, I drag this past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That saw the Possible like a dawn grow pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the lost night before it, mute and vast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It dates remoter than God’s birth can reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had no birth but the world’s coming after.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the world’s to me as, after whispered speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause-ignored sudden echoing of laughter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That ’t has a meaning my conjecture knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But that ’t has meaning’s all its meaning shows.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-25" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>We are in Fate and Fate’s and do but lack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outness from soul to know ourselves its dwelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do but compel Fate aside or back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Fate’s own immanence in the compelling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are too far in us from outward truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know how much we are not what we are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And live but in the heat of error’s youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet young enough its acting youth to ignore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doubleness of mind fails us, to glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At our exterior presence amid things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sizing from otherness our countenance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeing our puppet will’s act-acting strings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">An unknown language speaks in us, which we</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Are at the words of, fronted from reality.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-26" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The world is woven all of dream and error</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but one sureness in our truth may lie⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when we hold to aught our thinking’s mirror</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We know it not by knowing it thereby.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For but one side of things the mirror knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knows it colded from its solidness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A double lie its truth is; what it shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By true show’s false and nowhere by true place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought clouds our life’s day-sense with strangeness, yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never from strangeness more than that it’s strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth buy our perplexed thinking, for we get</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the words’ sense from words⁠—knowledge, truth, change.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We know the world is false, not what is true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet we think on, knowing we ne’er shall know.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-27" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How yesterday is long ago! The past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is a fixed infinite distance from to-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bygone things, the first-lived as the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In irreparable sameness far away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the to-be is infinitely ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the place wherein it will be Now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the seen wave yet far up in the river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which reaches not us, but the new-waved flow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This thing Time is, whose being is having none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The equable tyrant of our different fates,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who could not be bought off by a shattered sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or tricked by new use of our careful dates.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This thing Time is, that to the grave will bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My heart, sure but of it and of my fear.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-28" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The edge of the green wave whitely doth hiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the wetted sand. I look, yet dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surely reality cannot be this!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somehow, somewhere this surely doth but seem!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sky, the sea, this great extent disclosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of outward joy, this bulk of life we feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not something, but something interposed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only what in this is not this is real.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If this be to have sense, if to be awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be but to see this bright, great sleep of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the rarer potion mine own dreams I’ll take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for truth commune with imaginings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Holding a dream too bitter, a too fair curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This common sleep of men, the universe.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-29" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My weary life, that lives unsatisfied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the foiled off-brink of being e’er but this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom the power to will hath been denied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the will to renounce doth also miss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sated life, with having nothing sated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the motion of moving poisèd aye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within its dreams from its own dreams abated⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This life let the Gods change or take away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this endless succession of empty hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like deserts after deserts, voidly one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth undermine the very dreaming powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dull even thought’s active inaction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tainting with fore-unwilled will the dreamed act</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Twice thus removed from the unobtained fact.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-30" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I do not know what truth the false untruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this sad sense of the seen world may own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if this flowered plant bears also a fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the true reality unknown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as the rainbow, neither earth’s nor sky’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stands in the dripping freshness of lulled rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hope, not real yet not fancy’s, lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athwart the moment of our ceasing pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somehow, since pain is felt yet felt as ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope hath a better warrant than being hoped;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since pain is felt as aught we should not feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man hath a Nature’s reason for having groped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Since Time was Time and age and grief his measures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Towards a better shelter than Time’s pleasures.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-31" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I am older than Nature and her Time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the timeless age of Consciousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my adult oblivion of the clime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I was born makes me not countryless.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay, and dim through my daylight thoughts escape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yearnings for that land where my childhood dreamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I cannot recall in colour or shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But haunts my hours like something that hath gleamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet is not as light remembered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to the left or to the right conceived;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all round me tastes as if life were dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the world made but to be disbelieved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus I my hope on unknown truth lay; yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How but by hope do I the unknown truth get?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-32" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I have sense of what to sense appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sense is sense ere ’tis mine or mine in me is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I hear, Hearing, ere I do hear, hears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I see, before me abstract Seeing sees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am part Soul part I in all I touch⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soul by that part I hold in common with all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I the spoiled part, that doth make sense such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I can err by it and my sense mine call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest is wondering what these thoughts may mean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That come to explain and suddenly are gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like messengers that mock the message’ mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Explaining all but the explanation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As if we a ciphered letter’s cipher hit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And find it in an unknown language writ.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-33" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>He that goes back does, since he goes, advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he doth not advance who goeth back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he that seeks, though he on nothing chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May still by words be said to find a lack.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This paradox of having, that is nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the world’s meaning of the things it screens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is yet true of the substance of pure thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there means something by the nought it means.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thinking nought does on nought being confer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As giving not is acting not to give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, to the same unbribed true thought, to err</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is to find truth, though by its negative.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So why call this world false, if false to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Be to be aught, and being aught Being to be?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-34" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Happy the maimed, the halt, the mad, the blind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All who, stamped separate by curtailing birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Owe no duty’s allegiance to mankind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stand a valuing in their scheme of worth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I, whom Fate, not Nature, did curtail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By no exterior voidness being exempt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must bear accusing glances where I fail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fixed in the general orbit of contempt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fate, less than Nature in being kind to lacking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving the ill, shows not as outer cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making our mock-free will the mirror’s backing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Fate’s own acts as if in itself shows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And men, like children, seeing the image there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Take place for cause and make our will Fate bear.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-35" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Good. I have done. My heart weighs. I am sad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The outer day, void statue of lit blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is altogether outward, other, glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At mere being not-I (so my aches construe).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, that have failed in everything, bewail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing this hour but that I have bewailed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in the general fate what is’t to fail?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, fate being past for Fate, ’tis but to have failed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever hap or stop, what matters it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sith to the mattering our will bringeth nought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the higher trifling let us world our wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conscious that, if we do’t, that was the lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The regular stars bound us to, when they stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Godfathers to our birth and to our blood.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
